en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1046', "Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; hand, dates of composition, and especially paper would suggest the last two decades of the 18th century. Date of 1296 [1879] at the close of Hulâsatü'l-itibar on fol.69 is possibly a corruption of 1195 [1781], the date of composition of this work ; it appears to have been entered by the rubricator who supplied many of the textual dividers and some overlining.", 'Accompanying materials: Slip with inscription in black ink between fol.11 and fol.12.', 'Former shelfmark: On front flyleaf, from Bouwman Books "msturk194".', 'Binding: Pasteboards (thin) covered in dark red brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures (board linings) in fine marbled paper (ebru) in grey, light blue, light brown and black ; upper and lower covers carry a ruled rectangular central panel and gold-tooled borders in a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and yellow, tailband damaged ; overall in fairly goold condition with minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines (horiztonal) per cm., chain lines (vertical) spaced 26 mm. apart, and watermark of scrollwork with horn in shield, crown above, trefoil and "D& C Blauw" below (mark of the Dutch papermaking firm of Dirk & Cornelius Blauw, see Voorn pp. 543-4 ; 558-9, roughly 115 x 115 mm. including name of firm, compare Gravell Nos. TJ 163, TJ 162, TJ 137, TJ 709, TJ 351 / SLD.349.2, SLD.349.1, SLD.345.1, SLD.400.1, SLD.378.1 dated 1783-1793).', 'Decoration: Keywords and many notabilia rubricated ; written area surrounded by red rule-borders ; overlining in red ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine, very neatly formed Ottoman hand, in a medium line ; partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on occasional lām, slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, many open counters, pointing mainly in strokes or conjoined dots, partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV+1 (9), V+1 (20), V (30), V+1 (41), V+1 (52), V (62), V+1 (73), III (79) ; final five leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in pencil, Western numerals (supplied by book seller).', 'Incipit: [Sefaretname] "حمد موفور وسپاس نامحصور مالك ملكوت آسمان زمين اولان خدواند جهان آفرينه سزادركه ارسال رسل ورسائل ضمننده تبيين ملل واديان ... اما بعد تقرير كمترين بندكان ديوان سامى الحاج احمد رسمى بودركه بلاد شماليۀ غربيه دن جرمانيا او آلمانيا مملكتى داخلنده في الاصل سقصونه ايالتندن معدود اولان برآنده برق سنجاغنه القطورلق نشانى ..." ; [Hulâsatü\'l-itibar] "ايفاى حمد وثناى خداوند علام واجراى وضيفۀ صلوة وسلام ختامندنصكره معروض انديۀ بهيۀ كرام بودركه فاتحۀ معمورۀ عالم ..." ; [Kıta-yi Halifetü\'r-rüesa] "اشبو مقالۀ مشكين كلاله بيان وفيات ... محصوره اولميوب على العموم كتاب معارف انتسابه مسرح عيون اعتبار ومنهاج رفتار وانحدار اولمق ملاحظه سيله اواخر ملوك بني اميه واوائل دولت عباسيه ده رئيس الكتاب وفن كتابت وانشاده مقتداى شيخ وشاب اولان عبد الحميد بن سعيدك شرذمۀ [؟] كتابه دستور شمائل وشعار ... بلاغت علامه سى بطريق الترجمه بو محله ذيل وخاتمه قلنمشدر وهى هذه صناعت كتابت ومنقبت فصاحت وخطابتله موصوف اولان ..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf.', 'Ms. codex.', "5. fol.69b-fol.74b : [Kıta-yi Halifetü'r-rüesa] / Ahmet Resmî Efendi.", "4. fol.28b-fol.69a : [Hulâsatü'l-itibar] / Ahmet Resmî Efendi.", '3. fol.27b-fol.28a : [blank].', '2. fol.22b-fol.27a : [Layiha] / Ahmet Resmî Efendi.', '1. fol.1b-fol.22a : [Sefaretname-yi Ahmet Resmî] / Ahmet Resmî Efendi.', "Fine collection (mecmua) of works by Ahmet Resmî Efendi, opening with his Sefaretname, an account of his embassy to Berlin in 1177-78/1763-64, followed by the Layiha he presented to Muhsinzade Mehmed Paşa (d.1188/1774) as the Ottomans undertook negotiations with the Russians to end the Russo-Ottoman War (1768-74), next his critical and satirical history of that war Hulâsatü'l-itibar, and closing with an excerpt from Halifetü'r-rüesa (see pp.73-81 of the 1853 Istanbul edition), his biographical work on Ottoman chief scribes, addressing the scribal arts as modeled in the work of the first great scribe of Islam, ʻAbd al-Ḥamīd ibn Yaḥyá ibn Saʻīd al-Kātib (d.750)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 977', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 126', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "شروح تهذيب الاخلاق | J.H.D." ; sewn in heavy white thread, seemingly over two recessed cords, though difficult to examine ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Wove paper.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact, elegant hand in a thin to medium line (line thickness changes) ; serifless and freely ligatured with effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 17-21 lines per page.', "Collation: i, 2 VIII(32), i ; two octonions (gatherings of eight bifolia) ; pages between sections (corresponding to gatherings) left blank, with one serving as section 'title page' (see p.33) ; pagination in pencil and black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, in opening section only through page٢٨ ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "ثم اعلم ان من وصل الى مرتبة اكتساب الفضائل وجب عليه تأديب غيره وافاضة ما اعطاه الله على ابناء جنسه', 'Incipit: "نحمدك اللهم ولا نحصى ثناء عليك ونستغفرك ونسترضيك ونتوب اليك ... اما بعد فان الله تعالى بعد ان خلق الخلائق وذرأ البرايا اصطفى منها نوع الانسان وجبله من طين مؤلف من مختلف الاركان والمواد ... وكان مما ظفرت به يدي واسعدني به دهري كتاب تهذيب الاخلاق وتطهير الاعراق للحكيم الفاضل ... ابو [كذا] علي احمد بن محمد بن يعقوب بن مسكويه ... فلهذا وذاك وجدتني نشطا الى تهذيبه وتلخيصه ... فما زلت اعاني النفس في ذلك ... فذلكة الكتاب والكتاب يشتمل على مقدمة ومقالات اربع ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful though incomplete copy of an anonymous abridgement of Abū ʻAlī Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad Miskawayh’s (d. 1030) treatise on ethics, Tahdhīb al-akhlāq wa-taṭhīr al-aʻrāq. See Isl. Ms. 934 for another manuscript copy.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 343', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.307, copied in Qazvīn in 905 [1499 or 1500].', 'Former shelfmark: "486 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "١٣٥" on recto of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards now fully covered in spring-green silk faced / backed with paper (covered boards faced and lined, i.e. silk fully wraps apparently already leather-faced boards as with an overcover / slipcover, compare Isl. Ms. 341) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; flyleaves in yellow surface-dyed and gold-flecked European laid paper (scrollwork with tower at center and "CENEDA" below in back flyleaf [?]) ; upper and lower covers bear traces of stamped mandorlas beneath the textile ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and yellow, fairly good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with some staining, abrasion, lifting and losses of cloth and paper, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical, indistinct) and no chain lines clearly visible, quite thin and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished, dark cream in color ; endleaves in European laid paper ; some staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche and flanking pieces overlaid and surrounded with swirling arabesques and floral motifs in shades of gold, red, orange, and pink on fields of lapis lazuli, surrounded by border of turquoise interlace and surmounted by another rectangular piece carrying a row of intertwining arabesque and chī clouds with floral motifs (all in green, lavender, orange, and pink) on a gold ground, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area surrounded by gold frame with defining black fillets and outermost blue rule, columns within also defined by gold rules ; written area gold-flecked ; interlinear glosses rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in roughly 15 lines per page, with written area mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, IV-1 (7), 18 IV(151), I+1 (154), ii ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," mainly in Arabic, reads "تم الكتاب بدار الموحدين قزوين سنه خمس وتسعمايه م"', 'Incipit: "اقتتاح سخن آن به که کندن اهل کمال بثنای ملک الملک خدای متعال ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of a selection of the collected poems of Kamāl Khujandī (d.1400 or 1).'])

en: (count: ['Contains tables and diagrams of the markings on astronomical instruments.', 'Text rubricated; marginal notes in hand of copyist and others.', '"Said by the dealer from whom it was purchased to be a rare work on astronomical instruments by Abū Jaʻfar Naṣīr al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥasan, al-Ṭūsī, 587/1201-672/1274. No such treatise by Naṣīr al-Dīn is listed among his works by Suter or Brockelmann, and the author\'s name does not appear in this manuscript.... The beginning [is] lost ... it is apparent that many other folios have been either lost or misplaced." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.', 'Instructions on how to make astrolabes and other astronomical manuscripts, and how to use them in astronomical observations.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 580', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.217, second work copied by Aḥmad ibn Abī al-Qāsim with transcription completed 1149 [1736 or 7]. Opening work undated, but likely executed in roughly the same period, early to mid 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 42c" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition) with pendants and tooled rule border ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and black (or dark grey), good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, staining, lifting of leather (particularly at board edges), exposure and delamination of boards, etc. ; repairs in dark blue or black cloth.', 'Support: European laid paper of at least two types ; opeing type (first work) with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 24-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and triple mount watermark with "FB" underneath (see p.10, 38, 39, etc.), sturdy and dense ; second work mainly in a type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23 mm. apart (horizontal), and sun with rays and face (eyes and nose, see p.116, 118, 200, etc.)', 'Decoration: Section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of three dots.', 'Script: Maghribī ; two elegant hands with effect of slight tilt to the right, sweeping descenders, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 17 and 28 lines per page.', 'Collation: VI+ 2 (14), 2 V(34), V+3 (47), II+3 (54), VI+1 (67), 3 VI(103), IV (111) ; many senions (sexternions) ; second quire of second work (pp.109-132) mistakenly bound before the first quire, hence opening of text appears on p.136 ; foliation in pencil, Western numerals, supplied for second work by inventory cataloguer ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: [Kitāb al-Taysīr wa-al-tashīl] "Scribal," rectangular, reads "...كمل كتاب التيسير والتسهيل تأليف الشيخ الجليل ابي زيد سيد عبد الرحمن بن عبد القادر ... على يد ناسخه ... احمد بن ابي القاسم ... بتارسخ عام ١١۴۹ ..."', 'Incipit: [Tuḥfat al-ḥukkām] "قال الشيخ رحمه الله الحمد لله الذي يقضي ولا يقضي عليه جل شانه ... وبعد فالقصد بهذا الرجز تقرير الاحكام بقول موجز ..." ; [Kitāb al-Taysīr wa-al-tashīl] "يقول العبد الفقير الى الله ... عبد الرحمن بن عبد القادر ... الحمد لله الملك القديم العالم العظيم الكريم ... وبعد فلما كان باب المغارسة من جملة ما ينبغي للمؤلفين المختصرين ان يتعرضوا له ... طلب مني بعض اخواننا ... ان اجمع في الباب مسائل [؟] جملة وان اذكر في ذلك احكاما مهمة ... ولما لخصته وهذبته ودرجته وقربته ظهر ان اسميه بالتيسير والتسهيل في ذكر ما اغفله الشيخ خليل من احكام المغارسة والتوليح والتصيير ..."', "Title from inscription on opening 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. composite codex.', '6. p.218-p.222 : [various excerpts].', "5. p.136-p.217 : ['resumes' Kitāb al-Taysīr wa-al-tashīl] / Abū Zayd ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʻAbd al-Qādir al-Fāsī.", '4. p.133-p.135 : [various excerpts].', '3. p.109-p.132 : al-Taysīr wa-al-tashīl fī dhikr mā aghfalahu al-shaykh Khalīl min aḥkām al-mughārasah wa-al-tawlīj wa-al-taṣyīr /Abū Zayd ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʻAbd al-Qādir al-Fāsī.', '2. p.107-108 : [various excerpts].', '1. p.2-p.106 : Tuḥfat al-ḥukkām fī nukat al-ʻuqūd wa al-aḥkām / Abū Bakr Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad ibn ʻĀṣim al-Gharnaṭī.', "Fine Maghribī copy of Ibn ʻAṣim's (d.1426) famous treatise of Mālikī law in 1698 rajaz verses, Tuḥfat al-ḥukkām fī nukat al-ʻuqūd wa al-aḥkām followed by al-Taysīr wa-al-tashīl fī dhikr mā aghfalahu al-shaykh Khalīl min aḥkām al-mughārasah wa-al-tawlīj wa-al-taṣyīr, a commentary by ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʻAbd al-Qādir al-Fāsī (d.1685) on al-Mukhtaṣar, the renowned compendium of Mālikī law by Khalīl ibn Isḥāq al-Jundī (d.1365)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1024', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at close on p.397 (now affixed to lower pastedown), transcription apparently completed in Rabīʻ I 1286 [i.e. June-July 1869].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with description in hand of Jameson "Biographical text| Ḥadīth literature [crossed out] | [month] Rabīʻ al-awwal 1386? or 1286? | Brought to RBR on 10-27-70 by Mr. Eilts. | Purchased by Mr. Sulaiman from Librarie Tunisienne in 1967. Letters & invoice in MSS file" -- b. A few small pages torn from a printed book, text appears to be an excerpt from the listing of the Companions of the Prophet who took part in the Battle of Badr.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 173', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; upper pastedown / board lining and decoratively trimmed hinge in brown and cream mottled paper (sponge painted or faux marbled look) ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition) and pendants with tooled rosette accents and rule border ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn in cream thread over three recessed cords ; worked chevron endbands in lime green and yellow, fair condition with minor losses to tailband ; overall in fair condition with some staining, moisture damage (especially to lower cover), lifting and losses of spine leather, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 30-32 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of crescent with face in profile in shield (see p.10, 12, 13, 272, 273, 394, etc.) and "A G" [i.e. Andrea Galvani] countermark (see p.20, 112, 113, 392, etc.), dense and sturdy, only lightly burnished ; minor pest damage.', 'Decoration: Headings and some keywords rubricated, others in dark red / brown, blue or green ; written area surrounded by dark red / brown double rule-border (with blue rule defining margin of incipit and facing page) ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas.', 'Script: Maghribī ; elegant hand in a fine line, mainly serifless with sweeping descenders, effect of some ascenders tilting to the right, pointing in distinct dots, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 19 V(190), V-1 (199) ; exclusively quinions ; final leaf now partly affixed to lower board lining ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf and skips two pages between pp.317-318).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "حرر في ربيع الاول سنة ١٢٨٦"', 'Explicit: "سبحان ربك رب العزة عما يصفون وسلام على المرسلين والحمد لله رب العالمين ... كمل الكتاب المبارك بحمد الله تعالى وحسن عونه والصلاة والسلام على من لا نبي بعده ..."', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعل قلوب اوليائه محل معرفته ... وبعد فيقول العبد الفقير لمولاه الراجي مغفرته ورحمته ورضاه حمدون بن محمد الشريف الحسيني الجوطي لما دعاني منادي السعادة بلسان حاله على الافادة ... فيسر الله تعالى علي الطريق وقادني التوفيق الى معرفة القطب الامام ... مولانا الطيب بن القطب العارف بالله ... سيدي محمد بن القطب الكامل ... مولانا عبد الله الشريف الحسيني العلمي اليملاحي فاخذت عنه بواسطة تلميذه الشريف ... وكنت الازم الشيخ مولاي قاسم المذكور فاسمع منه اشارات وحكايات ينقلها عن ساداتنا المذكورين ... وسميته تحفة الاخوان ببعض مناقب شرفاء وزان ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.7.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the history of the shurafāʼ (descendants of the Prophet) of Wazzān by Ḥamdūn ibn Muḥammad al-Ṭāhirī al-Jūṭī (d.1777), followed by sayings and poetic excerpts attributed to the shurafāʼ.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 41', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.48a (p.97), copied by ʻAbd al-Fattāḥ ibn al-Sayyid ʻAbd Allāh al-Qaysī. Transcription finished ("wa-kāna al-farāgh minhā...") 10 Shawwāl 1265 [ca. 29 August 1849]. Corrected by the author as attested by his autograph on fol.48a (p.97).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 156. Risalah fi \'l-hajj."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in green paper with spine, fore-edge flap, and edges/turn-ins in red leather ; Type II binding (with flap, tucked inside lower cover) ; board linings in paper ; sewn in white thread, two stations ; chevron endbands in blue and white ; in fair condition with abrasion, staining, lifting of leather at spine and fore-edge, etc.', 'Support: European laid and wove paper ; first two quires in laid paper with chain lines spaced 25-27 mm. apart (vertical) and roughly 10 laid lines per cm., tre lune watermark and cursive "G B [?]" countermark ; latter three quires in wove paper.', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with keywords, section headings, overlining, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; bold Turkish hand ; sans serif ; angular ; descenders tapered or flattened ; many open counters ; pointing with two dots fairly distinct ; very slight effect of tilt to left ; horizontal strokes somewhat elongated.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, 5 V(50) ; entirely quinions ; final two leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (begins on fol.2 with ٢ and ends on fol.48 with ٤٨) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "تم وكان الفراغ منها في شهر شوال ١۰ تمت بخير على يد الفقير الزليل عبد الفتاح ابن السيد عبد الله القيسي غفر الله له ولوالديه ولكل المسلمين والمسلمات الاحياء والامهات [؟] سنة ۱۲٦٥"', 'Explicit: "فالعاقل الذي يؤاثر اخرته على دنياه ويغتنم التشرف بالنبي صلى الله عليه وسلم على الدوام رزقنا الله واياك ذلك على احسن حال واتم مرام على ما يرضى الله ويرضى رسوله صلى الله عليه وسلم ولا تنسني من دعائك بلغك الله ذلك والحج المبرور الذي ليس له جزاء الا الجنة وجميع مقاصدك من خير الدنيا والآخرة بحرمة النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم وجميع الانبياء والمرسلين مع الصحة والعافية وردك سالما مقبولا وجميع الحجاج امين تم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله ميسر الامور ومنور القلوب وشارح الصدور والصلاة والسلام على سيدنا محمد النبي المؤيد المنصور وعلى جميع اله واصحابه اهل الكمال والحضور ما قصدت حجاج زيارة نبيهم المصطفى بدر البدور والبيت الحرام وعرفة وفازوا بعظيم الثواب وجزيل الاجور اما بعد فهذا منسك مختصر على مذهب الامام الاعظم ابي حنيفة المقدم رحمه الله تعالى مشتمل على ما لا بد منه لكل من قصد الحج الى بيت الله الحرام وزيارة حضرة النبي عليه افضل الصلاة واكل السلام ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' fol.1a (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', "Clear copy of a Ḥanafī tract on the Pilgrimage by Aḥmad ibn ʻUmar al-Islāmbūlī (al-Istānbūlī, see Kaḥḥālah p.28, v.2 ed. Dimashq, 1958). Collated and corrected by the author and carrying his autograph (see 'titlepage' fol.1a/p.3 and fol.48a/p.97 in particular)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 899', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, hand, etc. may suggest 18th or possibly 17th century. Date in oval seal impression provides only very rough terminus ante quem of 1803, since seal impression could have been made years before its use in the volume.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with note "counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" -- b. Slip with note "Persian Manuscripts (Heyworth-Dunne?) No Husselman or Meredith-Owen notes" -- c. Recycled card with notes in hand of Emilie Savage-Smith [?] "poetry | Persian | many marginal annotation | 19th c. binding" -- d. Scrap with inscription in ink "Khāqānī : Tuḥfat al-ʻirāqain."', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 48', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in block-printed paper (red floral vegetal design with blue accents) with light brown leather over spine and board corners (half binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) though not flush with text block ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted paper with many inclusions and fibers visible ; sewn in heavy cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in dark blue and cream, fair condition (protected by spine leather) ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct, some curving) and occasional chain lines visible (vertical, possibly grouped, see p.183, 187, etc.), cloudy formation, sturdy though thin and transluscent, light brown in color, well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, with written area mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: ii, 13 IV(104), II (108), i ; almost exclusively quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of oblique strokes in black, upper outer margin of right-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, first at the center of the upper margin, then in outer corner, begins with "1" on incipit page.', 'Incipit: "مائیم نظار گان غمناک زین حقه سبز و مهره خاک ..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine though defective copy (lacking at end) of the mas̲navī describing the author's ḥājj journey from Shirvān to Mecca and back by the outstanding Persian poet Afz̤al al-Dīn Shirvānī Khāqānī (d.1199)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 400', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on pp.166-167, Tuhfe-yi Şâhidî copied by al-Ḥājj Ibrāhīm ibn al-Ḥājj Muḥammad (Hacı İbrahim bin Hacı Mehmet), keeper of the two lamps in the service of the sultan [?] ("الخليفة على السراجين المخصوصين بالخدمة السلطانية"), with transcription completed Jumādá I 1135 [February-March 1723]. Index lacks dated colophon though transcription likely executed around the same time ; paper, decoration, etc. suggest 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Inserts carrying continuation of glosses (paginated pp.73-74, 155-156).', 'Former shelfmark: "٣۰٣" inscribed in black ink on upper cover ; "۱۷٥" inscribed in black ink on front flyleaf ; "550 [?] T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on back flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown to black leather ; Type II binding (with flap), likely two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; board linings in marbled paper (mainly in blue-green, lavender, orange, and red), leather hinges (not extension of spine lining in this instance) ; upper and lower covers carry stamped (red recessed onlays), gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. NSd 7) and pendants, along with tooled accents (mainly rosettes) and border (guilloché roll defined by gold fillets) in gold ; design continues on flap ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and light blue, damaged with cores exposed ; overall in fairly good condition with only minor staining and abrasion.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; in opening work (through p.60), mainly a type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 24-26 mm. apart (horizontal) and watermark of crown with heart above grapes (raisin, see p.42, 44, 45, 48, etc.) and countermark "AS" [?] (see p.52, etc.), quite sturdy, beige in color, burnished, and a thinner and smoother type with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of grapes (raisin) with cartouche and crown above (see p.22, etc.) ; in second work (p.61 to close), mainly a type with 11-12 laid lines per cm. (vertical, more distinct), chain lines spaced 23-25 mm. apart (horizontal, more distinct), and watermark of grapes under crown (see p.86, 88, 100, 102, etc.), transluscent and crisp though quite sturdy, well-burnished to glossy, beige to buff in color, and another thinner type, lighter in color, with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-28 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of lion rampant [?] watermark (see p.62, 126, 130, 162, etc.).', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of index on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with cartouche (carrying the opening heading in red "باب الالف مع الباء") flanked by vegetal motifs in gold, surmounted by scalloped dome or semi-circular piece filled with swirling floral vegetal composition, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in gold ; splendid illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of Tuhfe-yi Şâhidî on p.62, consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral vegetal accents in pink, lavender, red and orange on a blue and pale gold ground, surmounted by scalloped w-shaped piece filled with elegant swirling floral vegetal decoration in gold, pink, white, blue, lavender, orange, red, etc. on a pale gold and blue ground, itself surmounted by elaborate vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue with red accents, entire piece set in a well of light blue, pink and gold bands ; written area surrounded by gold frame defined by black fillets, divisions within and margins defined by narrow gold bands outlined by black fillets ; keywords, sections headings, numerals, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas.', 'Script: Naskh and nastaʻlīq (talik) ; at least two elegant Ottoman hands ; bulk of index in a delicate naskh, partially but somewhat irregularly seriffed with slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, freely ligatured (with point of final nūn usually conjoined with bowl), fully vocalized ; final portion of index (see p.58) in an elegant nastaʻlīq (talik) ; Tuhfe-yi Şâhidî in another elegant naskh in a bolder line, mainly serifless (though serif rarely appears) with effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct or conjoined dots, fully vocalized ; glosses accompanying Tuhfe-yi Şâhidî in a quite compact naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik).', 'Layout: Written mainly in 13 lines per page, with written area divided to two columns ; for every other leaf, entire written area (at roughly the ruled marginal dimensions) is devoted to gloss ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, III+4 (10), IV (18), V (28), I+1 (31), 5 V(81), I+1 (84), i ; chiefly quinions ; occasional lacuna on leaves ruled for glosses ; pagination in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and skips opening leaf).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "ولما من الله على محرر هذه السطور بتنميق الحروف على قواعد الرسم المخبور حمده على انعامه وفضله وكرمه اذ اهله لنعم عليه منها ملابس وكل نعمة منها عنده هي انفس النفايس وكان محررها الفقير الاواه الحاج ابراهيم بن الحاج محمد الخليفة على السراجين المخصوصين بالخدمة السلطانية الراجى كل منهما عفو مولاه فى تاريخ سنة خمس وثلاثين ومائة والف من شهر جمادى الاولى من السنة المزبورة غفر الله له ولوالديه ولمن دعا لهم بالمغفرة ولجميع المسلمين م م م"', 'Explicit: [Tuhfe-yi Şâhidî] "فاعلاتن فاعلاتن فاعلات بو كتابى اوكرن ايج آب حيات شاهدى يه هركيم ايلرسه دعا ايده محشرده شفاعت مصطفا"', 'Incipit: [Tuhfe-yi Şâhidî] "بنام خالق وحى وتوانا قديم وقادر وبينا ودانا"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '3. p.62-p.167 : [Tuhfe-yi Şâhidî] / Şahidî İbrahim Dede.', '2. p.60-p.61 : [blank].', '1. p.2-p.59 : [index for the vocabulary of Tuhfe-yi Şâhidî].', 'Elegant copy of the well-known versified Persian-Turkish vocabulary of Şâhidî İbrahim Dede of Muğla (d.1550) with extensive glosses (occupying every other leaf), preceded by an index of the vocabulary arranged by letter.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 399', 'Origin: As appears at the close in the margin of p.92, completed in 1123 [1711 or 12] and apparently presented to Nevşehirli Damat İbrahim Pasha (d.1730). This may refer to the composition of the gloss rather than the execution of this manuscript though paper, etc. are certainly consistent with an early 18th century dating.', 'Former shelfmark: "428 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf (p.1) ; "122" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.5).', 'Binding: Pasteboards (quite thin, semi-limp) covered in dark maroon leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in marbled paper (in pink, yellow, blue) ; upper and lower covers carry gold-tooled border and accents ; sewn in pink thread, four stations ; only traces of endband primaries remain ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of spine leather, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 20-21 mm. apart (vertical) and assorted raisin watermarks including grapes under cartouche and crown (p.92, etc.), grapes alone (p.16, etc.) and cartouche alone, dark cream in color, fairly transluscent though sturdy, crisp, highly sized and burnished to glossy ; flyleaves in a different European laid paper with three hats watermark.', 'Decoration: Superb illuminated headpiece at opening on p.6 consisting of a scalloped w-shaped piece with floral vegetal decoration in pink, lavender, blue, red, and white on fields of gold, blue and green (turquoise), set in a well of red and white and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) ; written area throughout surrounded by a gold frame ; margins and columns within also outlined by gold rules ; red discs accent the text ; whole passages of the gloss rubricated or chrysographed to set off the designs.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 7 lines per page ; written area divided to two columns ; frame-ruled ; marginalia in exquisite shapes, mainly floral, quite artistically arranged.', 'Collation: ii, 4 V(40), IV (48) ; quinions followed by a quaternion ; final four leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and flyleaves).', 'Explicit: "فاعلاتن فاعلاتن فاعلات بو كتابى اوكرن ايج اب وحيات شاهدى يه هر كيم ايلرسه دعا ايده محشرده شفاعت مصطفى"', 'Incipit: "بنام خالق وحي وتوانا قديم وقادر وبينا ودانا"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the well-known versified Persian-Turkish vocabulary of Şâhidî İbrahim Dede of Muğla (d.1550) with extensive marginal glosses in exquisite shapes.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 395', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; decoration, paper, etc. suggest 18th century. According to date provided in a chronogram at the close ("بو تحفۀ حرمينم قبول [ايده] مولى") composition completed in 1093 [1682 or 3]. Date inscribed on \'title page\' may provide a rough terminus ante quem of 1795.', 'Former shelfmark: "510 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in red cut velvet (or flocked cloth or felt, low nap, see envelope flap) with dark red brown leather over spine, fore edge flap and edges / turn-ins (textile faced, leather edged framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in olive green European laid paper (fleur de lis watermark visible in lower board lining) ; upper and lower covers carry tooled borders in gold ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and pink [?], damaged with losses to headband ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, etc. ; subtle repairs to fore edge flap, etc. ; rehinged (paper).', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct, some curving) and no chain lines visible, medium cream in color, quite thin and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished ; front flyleaf in European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 29-30 mm. apart (vertical) and watermark of cross with initials below.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2, consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral motifs in white with red and orange accents on a ground of gold and blue (cobalt), surmounted by scalloped w-shaped piece filled with similar floral vegetal decoration in white with orange and red accents on fields of gold and cobalt, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue with red accents, entire piece set in well of blue and red bands with white accents ; floral accents in gold flanking the basmalah at opening on p.2 ; written area surrounded by gold frame defined by black fillets, divisions within defined by narrower gold bands outlined by black fillets ; keywords and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted discs.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; bold, elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, elongated horizontal strokes, pointing (for two and three dots) mainly in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 3 V(30), IV (38), VI (50), 4 V(90) ; chiefly quinions with a quaternion and a senion ; final two leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "ديدم تمامنه نابى بو نسخه نك تاريخ بو تحفۀ حرمينم قبول ايله [ايده] مولى"', 'Incipit: "اى بيت حرامى صف غفرانه مقام وى باب سلامى مدخل دار سلام ..."', 'Title from front flyleaf.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of the Ottoman poet Nabi's account of his pilgrimage (ḥajj) to Mecca and Medina."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 676', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on pp.313-14, composition of the work completed in the first part of Jumādá I 1063 [March-April 1653] with transcription of this copy completed 17 Shaʻbān 1174 [ca. 24 March 1761].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and label on lower cover, "IL 44" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in block-printed paper (swirling vegetal design, somewhat reminiscent of marbling, in black and pink on a blue ground) with red leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked endbands in dark brown and cream, damaged and nearly detached with threads undone and cores exposed ; overall in fair conditon with minor abrasion, lifting of spine leather, staining, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of names (see p.214, 215, etc.) and lion (or other four-legged beast / quadruped, see p.312, 317, etc.), sturdy and well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece at opening on p.6 consisting of a scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) with swirling floral vegetal decoration in lavender, red, green, etc. on a field of gold and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and red ; keywords, words being elucidated (as notabilia in margins), and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; overlining in red ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by heavy gold frame, elsewhere written area surrounded by red rule-border ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; an elegant Turkish hand, serifless, with dramatic tilt to the right, elongation of horizontal strokes, and mainly closed counters, though adhering fairly closely to the baseline.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: I (2), 16 V(162) ; almost exclusively quinions ; final five leaves originally left blank, now carry excerpts in a large bold hand ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Authorial" then "scribal," reads "وقع الفراغ من الجمع والتأليف سنة ثلاث وستين والف هجرة من له العز والشرف في اوائل شهر جمادى الاولى يسرنا الله ما هو اخرى واولى ونسأل الله تعالى التسديد والتأبيد وان يجعله خالصا لوجه ... والاولياء العظام والمشايخ الفخام ارباب التجريد رب احشنا معهم تحت لوائهم يا مجيد والحمد لله على الاتمام بعون الله الملك العلام في ١٧ شعبان المعظم سنة ١١٧٤"', 'Explicit: "دولت كونين اكا معطوف اوله فاعلاتن فاعلاتن فاعلات وزن بودر چون رمل محذوف اوله بحمد الله تعالى بو كتاب تحفة الملوك تمام وبو علم فاخرى تأليف وتصنيف اولنان ... ان ذاك القديم كان عديدا وسيبقى هذا الجديد قديما"', 'Incipit: "سپاس بى قياس وشكر بى مقياس اول خداى خالق جن وانسه اولسونكه ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.8.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of a commentary on the well-known versified Persian-Turkish vocabulary of Şâhidî İbrahim Dede of Muğla (d.1550), Tuhfe-yi Şâhidî [or Tuhfe-i Şâhidî]. Contents listing on opening added leaf (p.2). Excerpts at close (from p.315) address Fawāʼiḥ al-jamāl wa-fawātiḥ al-jalāl (here Fawātiḥ al-jamāl / فواتح الجمال) of al-Shaykh Najm al-Dīn al-Kubrá (d.1221).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 897', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest 19th century ; binding likely mid to late 19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with note "Counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" -- b. Slip with note "Persian Manuscripts (Heyworth Dunne?) No Husselman or Meredith-Owen notes" -- c. Scrap from catalog of law books in French [all no longer in volume].', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 46', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type III binding (without flap) though not flush with text block, etc. ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted European laid paper ; upper and lower covers blind-tooled in mitred-panel style, with outer border and inner panel stained to a dark brown ; spine blind-stamped with narrow bands and floral motifs ; edges of text block blue-flecked ; sewn in white thread over two cords (not recessed, visible as ridges at spine, flexible sewing) ; worked endbands, quite narrow ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly distinct, some curving) and chain lines spaced roughly 28-30 mm. apart (horizontal, curving), cream in color, thin and quite transluscent though sturdy, lightly burnished ; flyleaves in European laid paper with roughly 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (horizontal) and watermarks of Fortune (figure standing on ball holding banner aloft) and "VAN GELDER ZONEN" (compare Heawood no.1365), sturdy, cream in color.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand in a medium line ; serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, IV+1 (9), 8 IV(73), IV-1 (80), ii ; exclusively quaternions ; final leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "همه شب بیدار بود بر بستر نرم خفت"', 'Incipit: [Ṭūṭīʹnāmah] "بعد از جنس جنس ثنا و صفت پیدا کنندۀ آسمان و زمین کیفیت و حقیقت این است که داستان و قصه ها و حکایات گفتۀ حضرت نخشبی رحمت الله علیه که در طوطی نامه بعبارت سخت و دقیق نوشته بودند از برای مفصل و بیان وار معلوم شدن همه مردمان محمد خدواند قادری اصلح الله شانه ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.156-160 : [mainly blank].', '3. p.84-p.155 : [Ṭūṭīʹnāmah] / Z̤iyāʼ al-Dīn Nakhshabī ; Muḥammad Qādirī.', '2. p.83 : [blank].', '1. p.4-p.82 : [Persian alphabetic and grammatical exercises ].', 'Fine copy of the Ṭūṭīʹnāmah of Shaykh Z̤iyāʼ al-Dīn Nakhshabī (d.1350) in the reduced and simplified version of Muḥammad Khudavānd Qādirī (fl. 17th cent.), preceded by a selection of alphabetic and grammatical exercises with dialogues.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 319', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; decoration, etc. suggest late 16th or early 17th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "82 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on upper board lining.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather (pebbled quality of shagreen) ; Type III binding (without flap), possibly two-piece; board linings (pastedowns) in light pink-tinted laid paper, flyleaves in gold-flecked pink-tinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold-painted scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition surrounding two seated gazelles, recessed inlay) with pendants and gold-painted accents and borders ; sewn in light yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pale yellow and pale pink [?], tailband almost gone, headband damaged ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, staining, delamination of boards, lifting and losses of leather (inlay of upper mandorla), etc. ; edging (repair) in quite dark brown to black leather.', "Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and no chain lines visible, sturdy though thin and transluscent, well-burnished ; repair to opening leaf / 'title page' in European laid paper with coat of arms watermark (consisting of cross flanked by lions above two circles).", 'Decoration: Splendidly executed illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of large rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying the title in white ( "ديوان خواجه حافظ شيرازى" ) surrounded by swirling arabesque with floral accents in red, yellow, white, pink, light blue, red-orange, etc. on fields of blue (lapis lazuli) and gold (approaching lapis lazuli) with red border, surmounted by tall (vertically elongated) scalloped w-shaped piece filled with same manner of swirling arabesque with floral accents (carnation, etc.) in green, yellow, white, light pink, light blue, and red-orange on fields of blue (lapis lazuli) and gold, itself set into a well of red ; incipit and facing page carry finely executed illuminated marginal decoration in the form of swirling vegetal composition with large serrated sāz leaves and floral motifs in gold with blue and red accents ; written area throughout surrounded by a frame of gold bands defined by black fillets and outer blue and red rules ; text of incipit and facing page set off with gold cloud-bands ; occasional floral accents in green, red, white, light pink, gold etc. appear occasionally between sections of text.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, elongated horizontal strokes, somewhat exaggerated contrast in thickness of horizontal and vertical strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 16 lines per page ; written area often divided to two columns to set-off poetry ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, III+3 (9), 10 IV(89), 2 III(101), 4 IV(133), III (139), IV (147), III (153), III-2 (157), I (159), i ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present (though often cut off) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between pp.5-6).', 'Explicit: "گفتی که تو را شوم مدار اندیشه دل خوش کن و بر صبر گمار اندیشه کو صبر و چه دل انچه دلش میخوانی یك قطره خونست و هزار اندیشه تمت الکتاب"', 'Incipit: "الا یا ایها الساقی ادر کاسا و ناولها که عشق آسان نمود اول ولی افتاد مشکلها ..."', 'Title from illuminated headpiece at opening on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Dīvān of the masterful poet Ḥāfiẓ (Khvājah Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad Shīrāzī, d.1390?).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 597', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.48, copied by al-Sayyid ʻAbd al-Laṭīf ibn al-Shaykh Muṣṭafá (Abdüllatif bin Mustafa) with transcription completed 1179 [1765 or 6].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover "IL 25" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Boards covered in shell marbled paper (mainly in blue and brown) with red leather over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted wove paper ; resewn in white thread, four stations ; overall in fairly good condition with some abrasion, lifting of paper, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper ; mainly with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 31 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark (95 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.12, etc.), fairly thick, dense and sturdy, only lightly burnished ; another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25 mm. apart (horizontal), thin and crisp though sturdy, scarcely burnished if at all ; ink burn in final leaves.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols (signes de renvoi, etc.) rubricated ; some overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; angular Turkish (Eastern Anatolian) or Egyptian [?] hand ; virtually serifless with effect of marked tilt to the right, many open counters, pointing in distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ, some elongation of horizontal strokes, free assimilation of letters, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf).', 'Layout: Written in 23-27 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, II (4), V+1 (15), III+1 (22) ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "على يد العبد الضعيف خادم العالي الشريف السيد عبد اللطيف ابن المرحوم الشيخ مصطفى امام ... غفر لهما سنة ۱۱۷۹"', 'Explicit: "فهذا القدر ولم يبلغنا ولا اعتقده وقع لا حوض الاولياء ولا شك في وقوع مثله للانبياء عليهم السلام ممثل هذا يكون معجزة ولا تنتهي اليه الكرامة والله اعلم حسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل والحمد لله واحده [كذا] تمت بالخير"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي اتقن بحكمته كل شيء فاحتبك وبعث حبيبه محمدا صلى الله عليه وسلم فانار به كل حلك ... هذا انموذج لطيف وعنوان شريف لخصته من كتابي الكبير الذي جمعت فيه المعجزات والخصائص النبوية ... وسميته انموذج اللبيب في خصائص الحبيب ..."', "Title from heading on 'title page' / incipit page (p.7).", 'Ms. codex.', "Clear copy of Unmūdhaj al-labīb fī khaṣāʼiṣ al-ḥabīb (also known as al-Khaṣāʼṣ al-ṣughrá), the author's abridgment of his own Kifāyat al-labīb fī khaṣāʼiṣ al-ḥabīb (known as al-Khaṣāʼiṣ al-kubrá) on the virtues and distinctive attributes of the Prophet."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 830', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.65, opening work copied by Mehmet bin Abdürrahman, khaṭīb in the Ayasofya Camii, with transcription completed in 1211 [1796 or 7]. As appears in colophon on p.101-102, transcription for second work executed by the same copyist (Darzade Mehmet bin Abdurrahman) and completed 18 Rajab 1204 [ca. 3 April 1790].', 'Accompanying materials: Two scraps with listing of numerical values of the Arabic letters according to abjad (paginated pp.67-70).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (mainly in blue, salmon (orange) and white) with spine and edges/turn-ins in red leather (framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in pale blue laid paper ; sewn in pale yellow thread, two stations ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of paper, small for text block, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 21 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of lion with "A" visible underneath (see p.12,13, etc., face and tail visible in p.10,16, etc.), well-burnished to glossy, cream in color, thin and transluscent though sturdy.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Turkish hand ; serifless with slight inclination to the right and effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: VI (12), V (22), 2 VI(46), II (50) ; several senions with quaternion and binion ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: [Vafiyetü\'l-evkat] "قد تم هذه الرسالة عن يد عبد الضعيف المحتاج الى رحمة ربه الغفور محمد بن عبد الرحمن الخطيب فى جامع ايا صوفيه غفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه لسنه احدى عشر ومائتين والف م" ; [Kifayetü\'l-vakit li-marifeti\'d-dair ve\'l-fazle ve\'s-semt] "تمت الرسالة بعون الله تعالى تماما فى ۱۸ ب سنه ۱۲٠٤ قد تم هذه الرسالة عن يد عبد الضعيف المحتاج الى رحمة ربه الغفور محمد بن عبد الرحمن الملقب بطار زاده غفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه"', 'Explicit: [Vafiyetü\'l-evkat] "صونيه وارنجه در يكلوكى سكز زراع اولمش اولدر" ; [Kifayetü\'l-vakit li-marifeti\'d-dair ve\'l-fazle ve\'s-semt] "در قوس ارتفاع اوزرينه وضع ايلدك بو تقدير جه حيط سمت قبله يه مطابق اولدى قبله دحى قوس ارتفاعك طرفنه واقع اولدى"', 'Incipit: [Vafiyetü\'l-evkat] "الحمد لله رب العالمين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد سيد الاولين والاخرين وعلى سائر الانبياء والمرسلين وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين اما بعد بو عبد ضعيف المحتاج الى رحمة ربه الغفور مصطفى بن على الموقت بجامع الحاقانى السليمى ... ايدر ديلدمكه ربع مجيب ديمكله متعارف اولان الات رصديه ايجنده افاقى اولوب ... وبو رساله يه وافية الاوقات تسميه ايلدم ..." ; [Kifayetü\'l-vakit li-marifeti\'d-dair ve\'l-fazle ve\'s-semt] "الحمد لله الذى جعل البحر الاخضر الفلك قناطير المقطنرات ... وبعد بو احقر عباد الله مصطفى بن على الموقت بجامع الحاقانى السليمى ... وبو رساله يي كفاية الوقت لمعرفة الدائر والفضله والسمت برله تسميه ايدم ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from opening matter of first work (p.4) and opening matter of second work (p.74).', 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.103-104 : [blank].', "3. p.74-p.102 : Kifayetü'l-vakit li-marifeti'd-dair ve'l-fazle ve's-semt / Mustafa bin Ali Muvakkit.", '2. p.66-p.73 : [blank, with pp.67-70 representing two paginated inserts].', "1. p.4-p.65 : Vafiyetü'l-evkat / Mustafa bin Ali Muvakkit.", 'Careful copy of two treatises by Muvakkit Mustafa b. Ali (d.1571), timekeeper in the mosque of Sultan Selim II (r.1566-1574), the first on the use of the sine quadrant (rubʻ mujayyab) in 22 bābs and the second on the use of the almucantar or bridged quadrant (rubʻ al-muqanṭarāt) in 12 bābs.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1043', 'Origin: Colophon appears on p.487, but largely effaced. According to descriptive note on p.8, transcription and paintings executed by Muḥammad Yaʻqūb (محمد يعقوب), reads "... بقلم محمد يعقوب رسام تحرير يافت." Perhaps late 19th or early 19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: "a. "Happy New Year" card with black-and-white photographs showing carpet makers and a carpet seller ; small white card stapled to inside with notes in German (presumably handwriting of Dr. Gruening) -- b. Page from legal pad, handwriting of J. Eilts, notes on physical descr. & contents. -- c. Copy of letter, Frank J. Schulte of Grand Rapids, to Dr. Howard H. Peckham, Clements Library, U of M, 13 November 1976: \'During a two-year period (1962-64) I was a member of the Public Administration Service team in Kabul, Afghanistan. It was my good fortune to acquire, among other art objects, two illuminated manuscripts: one, small, exquisitely written on parchment [in margin at this point: "paper/HCJ"], the other a larger leather-bound book. According to Dr. Gruening, attached to the German Embassy in Kabul, the first is dated 1921 and was dedicated to a governor of Herat. Dr. Gruening estimated that the book\'s cover is, perhaps, 200 to 250 years old. (I wonder what vandalism was perpetrated to acquire the cover for the 1921 book). The larger book is inferior quality-wise but has a large number of water-color illustrations. The date of this book has been obliterated but might be determined by the use of infra-red light. It has been much used, perhaps by children, as one page shows some doodling...I have enjoyed the possession of these treasures for a long time now and, should your library want them, will be delighted to donate them. If you do want them, perhaps someone from the university who might have reason to be in Grand Rapids, will contact me.\'-- d. Copy of note on legal paper signed \'HCJ\'" - from handlist prepared by R. Dougherty, 1993.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 192', 'Binding: Pasteboards (soft) covered in brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted paper, hinges in pale green textile ; stab sewn in heavy cream thread ; worked chevron endbands in green-blue and yellow, quite wide and in good condition (protected by tabs extending from spine leather) ; overall in fairly good condition with some staining, minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support: Wove paper, some cream in color, others a darker beige (typically alternating) ; tissue weight leaves inserted to protect opening illumination and illustrations on p.26, 321, etc. ; stains, tears, etc.', 'Decoration: Fine illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) on what appears to be added incipit page (p.10, compare p.2) consisting of rectangular piece with cartouches carrying the basmalah, etc. ("بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم رب يسير وتمم بالخير") in black ink with gold and lapis lazuli accents, surmounted by tall, scalloped w-shaped piece with swirling floral vegetal motifs in gold with pink accents on a field of lapis and pink, set in a well of similar floral motifs in gold with lapis accents on a turquoise ground flanking the title "هذا كتاب وامق عذرا" in gold on a lapis ground, entire piece surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) with floral accents ; written area mainly surrounded by a multiple rule border in gold and blue, divisions within defined by double rule-border in blue ; keywords and headings rubricated ; extensively illustrated with 37 richly colored paintings in mid-19th century Persian style, most full page, many with captions, likely contemporary but executed separately from the text (see pp.22, 26, 43, 60, 70, 101, 105, 106, 113, 122, 143, 157, 165, 175, 176, 195, 220, 234, 259, 265, 275, 287, 321, 332, 371, 383, 393, 398, 399, 403, 404, 405, 413, 425, 437, 449, and 473) some on unruled leaves ; occasional lacunae left where illustration might have appeared (see p.69, 102, etc.) or simply to avoid overlap of text and illustration (area of the verso corresponding to the illustrated area on the recto usually left blank).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; compact, careful hand in a medium to bold line ; serifless, with marked effect of words descending to baseline, some elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 21 lines per page, occasionally divided to three columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: Too tightly bound to examine gatherings ; two flyleaves each at opening and close of codex, two added leaves at opening ; catchwords present ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin of each page ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and added leaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "قد تم بالخير والعافية ... شمسى ... قمرى هجرى نبوى صلوات الله عليه حين السلطنت ... شيخ محمد باقر خان ... يعقوب"', 'Explicit: "ز چشم خورده بین مستور بادا ..."', 'Incipit: "حمد بیحد ثنای بیعدد و مخصوص صانعی است ... اما بعد چنین گوید راقم این حروف که چون در بهار عالم جوانی ... در عشقبازی وامق و عذرا و مجملی از کیفیت احوال و سر گشتگی از حوادث زمانه پر اختلاف ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.14.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the romance of Vāmiq and ʻAẕrā, the Ardent Lover and the Virgin, by Mīrzā Ibrāhīm Ẓahīr Kirmānī (see preface of the Mashhad 1991 edition, p. 7 ff.). Illustrated with many colorful paintings. Contribution to the cataloguing from Hossein Mottaghi.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 546', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.261, copied by Aḥmad ibn Faraj Allāh ibn Aḥmad with transcription completed "laylat ʻArafah" 9 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 989 [ca. 4 January 1582]. As appears in \'authorial colophon\' on p.260, composition completed 10 Rajab 682 [ca. 4 October 1283]. Beginning after the close on p.260, copyist provides a brief transmission history for the copy from which he transcribed the current copy. Following the colophon on p.261 appears an excerpt from the author\'s commentary on this work Kitāb al-Kāfī fī sharḥ al-Wāfī (كتاب الكافي في شرح الوافي).', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inscription on \'title page\' (p.1) "IL 409" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in red leather with central blind-stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition reminiscent of Déroche class. NSd 5) ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; overall in fair condition with abrasion and staining, some lifting and losses of leather, delamination of upper board, etc. ; likely recycled covers (now inverted).', 'Support: European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (vertical), anchor in circle with star above watermark (see p.4, p.30, etc.), sturdy and well-burnished ; some leaves light peach or beige colored ; watermark of egg-like figure with six circles within, crown above and PIRENZE below in back flyleaf (compare nos. 378, 381, 387, and 394 dated 1724-1726 in Nikolaev, Watermarks of the Ottoman Empire, vol.1)', 'Decoration: Section headings and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; occasionally indication of text to be rubricated in margins visible.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Turkish hand (with Persianate features) ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, mainly curvilinear descenders (some sweeping), pointing in distinct dots, kāf mashqūqah preferred, initially somewhat compact but larger toward close.', 'Layout: Written in 17-19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: [i,] 7 V(70), IV (78), VI (90), V (100), 2 VI(124), III+2 (132), i ; chiefly quinions ; front flyleaf now affixed to opening leaf ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly skips two pages between pp.47-48).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "كتبته وانا معتصم بالله ورسوله ... وانا الفقير احمد بن فرج الله بن احمد وقد حصل الفراغ من هذا الكتاب بعد هوي من الليل وهي ليلة عرفة سنة تسع وثمانين وتسعمائة والحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على خير خلقه محمد وآله وصحبه اجمعين ..."', 'Explicit: "وقسم ما بقي على سهام ما بقي قد نجز الموعود بتوفيقه فاحسن بترتيبه وتلفيقه ... والحمد لله الذي بنعمته تتم الصالحات والصلوة على نبيه محمد واله وازواجه الطاهرات"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لمن من على عباده وعباده بارسال رسوله وهداية سبله ... قال مولانا الصدر الامام ... حافظ الملة والدين ابو البراكات عبد الله بن احمد بن محمود النسفي ... قد كان يخطر ببالي ابان فراغي ان ألف كتابا جامعا لمسائل الجامعين والزيادات حاويا لما في المختصر ونظم الخلافيات مشتملا على بعض مسائل الفتوى والواقعات ... وسميته الوافي ولو وفقت لشرحه لارسمه بالكافي ..."', 'Title from opening on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the Ḥanafī legal work modeled after al-Marghīnānī’s (d.1196 or 7) celebrated Hidāyah.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 225', 'Origin: As appears at the close of al-Kāfiyah on p.176, copied by ʻAbd al-Ghaffār ibn Ḥājj Sinān with transcription finished in the year 970 [1562 or 3]. Text of al-Wāfiyah in the same hand.', 'Former shelfmark: "325 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto front flyleaf (p.1) ; "134" inscribed in pencil on added leaf (p.3)', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather with much darker leather over envelope flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in combed marbled paper in salmon, blue, red, white, etc. ; upper and lower covers bear central blind-stamped and gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal composition compare Déroche class. OSd 3) and tooled border ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and blue, fairly good condition ; overall in fair condition with minor staining, abrasion, lifting of leather, etc. ; subtle repairs to spine, areas of board edges (covering tooled border), and fore edge flap in dark red-brown leather.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (fairly indistinct, vertical or horizontal, varies), sturdy, fairly transluscent, medium to dark cream in color, quite well-sized and burnished ; closing flyleaves in European laid paper with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (horizontal), and crossbow in circle watermark (trefoil above, V below), sturdy, cream in color, well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords, headings and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh ; both al-Wāfiyah and interspersed text of al-Kāfiyah in the same compact Turkish hand ; serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, some elongation of horizontal strokes, slight effect of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated).', 'Layout: Written mainly in 37-38 lines per page ; written area of each page arranged in three blocks of text - an upper and a lower block running horizontally with 9 lines each and a central block oriented vertically (running parallel to the spine of the text block) with 19-20 lines ; where the text of al-Kafiyah appears (pp.96-99, pp.147-153, pp.169-176, etc.) layout shifts to single column in 15 lines per page with glosses arranged in margins.', 'Collation: ii, V (10), II (114), 8 V(94), ii ; quinions and a binion ; lacks proper catchwords, but but last word of final line on the verso of each leaf is usually repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم الكتاب بعون الله وتوفيقه على يد اضعف العباد عبد الغفار بن حاج سنان الملتجئ بحرم تعليم الصبيان عام سبعين وتسع مائة من الهجرة النبوية"', 'Dedication: As appears in opening on p.6, composed for al-Amīr Nāṣir al-Dīn Yaḥyá ibn al-Malik Jalāl al-Dīn Ibrāhim ibn Yaghrush Bīlkā Malik al-Khitan.', 'Explicit: "فانك اذا قلت في يا زيدون اضربن اضربوا في الوقف وفي يا امرأة اضربن اضري في الوقف يعلم انه بدل عن النون او المحذوف المردود والله اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب"', 'Incipit: "احمد الله على عظمة جلاله حمد غريق بمطالعة جماله واشكره لجزيل نواله معتقد لمعاده ومآله ... وبعد فاني بعد ان شرحت كتاب الكافية في النحو اولا مع ايرادات واجوبة وابحاث كثيرة شرحته ثانيا مقتصرا على حل الفاظه وشرح معانيه والاشارة الى تحليل تركيباته ومبانيه وجعلته لرسم خدمت الامير الكبير ...سلالة الامراء والوزراء مفخر العرب والعجم ناصر الدولة والدين وشمس الاسلام والمسلمين يحيى بن المخدوم المعظم ملك ملوك الامراء والوزراء صاحب السيف والعلم صلاح العالم جلال الدنيا والدين ابراهيم بن يغرش بيلكا ملك الختن اعز الله انصارهما وضاعف في العالمين اقتدارهما بسبب اشتغالة هذا الكتاب الذي هو دستور في هذا الفن لاولى الالباب وسميته بالوافية في شرح الكافية لكونه وافيا لحل الفاظه وشرح معانيه"', 'Title from opening on p.6.', 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy of the commentary by Rukn al-Dīn al-Ḥasan ibn Muḥammad ibn Sharaf Shāh al-Astarābādhī (d.1315 or 6) upon al-Kāfiyah, Ibn al-Ḥājib's grammatical treatise on naḥw (syntax). The text of al-Kāfiyah is included, in sections of differing layout interspersed throughout."])

en: (count: ["Title page and colophon give name of copyist as Shaykh Ḥamdallah (also known as Ibn al-Shaykh, 1429-1520); perhaps the single most important Ottoman calligrapher according to Irvin C. Schick (28 December 1989). According to Muhittin Serin, the copy is not in Shaykh Ḥamdallah's hand but was copied in its entirety, including colophon, by another calligrapher in imitation of his style (April 1993). From notes on catalog card in repository.", 'Illuminated ʻunwān and colophon; text vocalized and enclosed within gold borders.', 'Date of early 16th cent. suggested by researcher (Muhittin Serin, April 1993).', 'Admonitions of ʻAlī to his son Muḥammad al-Ḥanafīyah.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 256', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.271, Wasāʼil al-sāʼil copied from an exemplar in the hand of the author with transcription completed ("wa-kāna al-farāgh min raqmih...") 22 Muḥarram 1132 [ca. 5 December 1719]. As appears in colophon on p.301, transcription of Nubdhah min inshāʼ al-shaykh Shams al-Dīn al-Nawājī completed 28 Muḥarram 1132 [ca. 11 December 1719].', 'Former shelfmark: "252 T. D. M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf (p.2) ; "126" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.5).', 'Binding: Pasteboards (thin, semi-limp) faced in dark red leather with dark brown leather now over spine and edges / turn-ins (possibly a repair) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in bright magenta coated paper ; upper and lower covers carry central blind-stamped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition) and flanking rosettes (typically seen on envelope flap compositions), along with constellations of tooled rosette accents and border in a series of s-shaped stamps and outermost gold fillets (over edging) ; sewn in golden yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in golden yellow and red, good condition ; overall in good condition with minor abrasion and staining.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23 mm. apart (horizontal) and no watermarks visible though perhaps cut off or otherwise obscured ; creamy and well-burnished ; some ink burn to breakthrough ; repairs in European wove paper.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening of Wasāʼil al-sāʼil on p.6, partially damaged and restored, consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) filled with swirling vegetal decoration, mainly in red and gold ; Section headings and keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by frame consisting of gold band with red and black rules ; written area in bulk of text surrounded by red-rule border.', "Script: Naskh ; clear Egyptian, 'Syrian,' or Turkish hand ; extensively but somewhat inconsistently seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on ascenders of alif (even freestanding), lām, ṭāʼ and ẓāʼ ; some elongation of horizontal strokes ; pointing for two and three dots in lines, with three dots represented by a curved mark resembling the letter dāl ; mainly curvilinear descenders ; freely ligatured.", 'Layout: Written mainly in 23 lines per page with written area often divided to two columns to set off poetry ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 4 V(40), IV (48), II (52), 2 IV(68), 3 V(98), III (104), V (114), 3 IV(138), V+1 (149), ii ; quinions and quaternions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: [Wasāʼil al-sāʼil] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "وهذا اخر ما وجدناه مكتتبا من كلام هذا الامام روح الله سبحانه وتعالى روحه وجعل من الرحيق المختوم غبوقه وصبوحه بمنه وكرمه وكان الفراغ من رقمه وقت العصر من يوم الاثنين المبارك ثاني عشري محرم الحرام افتتاح عام اثنين وثلاثين بعد مائة والف احسن الله سبحانه وتعالى ختامها آمين ونقل جميعه من خط الناظم رحمه الله تعالى وصلى الله على خير خلقه محمد وعلى آله وصحبه وسلم" ; [Nubdhah min inshāʼ al-Shaykh Shams al-Dīn al-Nawājī] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "وهذا اخر ما يسر الله كتابته من كلام هذا الامام عليه رحمة الملك العلام وكان الفراغ من كتابته في اليوم الثامن والعشرين من شهر محرم الحرام افتتاح عام اثنين وثلاثين بعد مائة والف خلت من الهجرة النبوية على مشرفها افضل الصلاة وازكى التحية وعلى آله وصحبه ذوي الرتب العلية"', 'Incipit: [Wasāʼil al-sāʼil] "حمدا لمن اطلع ثمار الادب على افنان الالسنة العربية ... وبعد فان مما يشفي القريحة الجريحة ... اعمال البدائية في انواع المحاضرات ... الاستاذ الاعظم والملاذ المعظم المولى محمد زين العابدين ... امرني وله الفضل ان اجمع له من ذلك ما هو حسب الامكان من الوجدان فاجبته قائما على قدم الطاعة ... سميتها وسائل السائل ورتبها على حروف المعجم وعلى الله القبول ..." ; [Nubdhah min inshāʼ al-Shaykh Shams al-Dīn al-Nawājī] "الحمد لله الذي فضل صناعة الكتابة وزاد اهلها شرفا وزينا ... وبعد فاعلم الكتابة علم شريف وفن لطيف لا يألفها الا صاحب ذوق سليم ولا يأنفه الا طبع غير مستقيم', "Title supplied by cataloguer from 'title page' (p.5).", 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.302-p.306 : [blank].', '3. p.272-p.301 : Nubdhah min inshāʼ al-shaykh al-imām al-ʻallāmah Shams al-Dīn al-Nawājī.', '2. p.5-p.271 : Wasāʼil al-sāʼil / Badr al-Dīn al-Dhahabī [?].', '1. p.1-p.4 : [blank].', 'Fine copy of Wasāʼil al-sāʼil a collection of poems and prose attributed to Badr al-Dīn al-Dhahabī [?], compiled on the order of al-Mawlá Muḥammad Zayn al-ʻĀbidīn. Followed by a selection of essays by Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Ḥasan al-Nawājī (d.1455) for which he obtained an ijāzah in ʻilm al-kitābah from Zayn al-Dīn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn al-Ṣāʼigh al-Mukattib (d.1441 or 2) (see statement at opening on p.302).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 658', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.109, opening work copied for himself by ʻAlī Nūr al-Dīn ibn al-Ḥasan Badr al-Dīn ibn Muḥammad Jalāl al-Dīn al-Barhamtūshī ( علي نور الدين بن الحسن بدر الدين بن محمد جلال الدين البرهمتوشي ) with transcription completed 3 Ramaḍān 977 [ca. 9 February 1570]. Second work appears to have been supplied by the same copyist around the same time.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and label on lower cover, "IL 411a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Boards covered in black cloth ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in light olive green wove paper ; resewn in white thread, six stations ; overall in good condition.', 'Support: European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 29 mm. (horizontal), anchor in circle watermark with six-pointed star above (see pp.6 and 12,etc.), "AP" or "AS" countermark (see p.8), well-sized and burnished, sturdy though fairly crisp.', 'Decoration: Section headings, keywords, and some abbreviation symbols (two-teeth stroke, etc.) rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; compact, somewhat angular Egyptian hand in a medium to bold line (line thickness varies somewhat) ; serifless with slight inclination to the left (with words descending to baseline), elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf), foot of final isolated lām quite flattened and elongated (sits on baseline).', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, V-1 (9), 5 V(59), I (61), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; final added bifolium left blank ; quire numbering in the form of whole words in the upper outer corner of the recto of the opening leaf of each quire (partially cut off) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: [al-Wasāʼil ilá maʻrifat al-Awāʼil] "تم بحمد الله وعون ولله الحمد والمنة اولا واخرا وباطنا وظاهرا وسرا وعلانية ... وعلقه لنفسه ثم لمن شاء الله تعالى من بعده اقل عبيد الله ... علي نور الدين بن الحسن بدر الدين بن محمد جلال الدين البرهمتوشي الشافعي [؟] غفر الله تعالى بكرمه ذنوبه وستر بعفوه ذنوبه وذلك في اليوم المبارك الثالث من شهر رمضان المعظم ... من شهور سنة سبع وسبعين وتسعمائة احسن الله ختامها وما بعدها في خير وعافية وسلامة امين امين امين وصلى الله علي سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم"', 'Incipit: [al-Wasāʼil ilá maʻrifat al-Awāʼil] "الحمد لله الاول فليس له اخر ... وبعد فهذا كتاب لطيف جامع للاوائل لخصت فيه كتاب الاوائل للعسكري وزدت عليه اضعافه ورتبته ترتيبا ... وسميته الوسائل الى معرفة الاوائل ..." ; [al-Kashf ʻan mujāwazat hādhihi al-ummah al-alf] "الحمد لله وسلام على عباده الذين اصطفى وبعد فقد كثر السؤال عن الحديث المشهور على السنة الناس ان النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم لا يمكث في قبره الف سنة وانا اجيب بانه باطل ... فقصدني القاصدون في كشف وسألني الواردون ان اجعل فيه مؤلفا يزدان لوصفه فاجبتهم الى ما سألوا وشرعت لهم ... وسميته الكشف عن مجاوزة هذه الامة الالف ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '3. p.119-p.122 : [blank].', '2. p.110-p.118 : al-Kashf ʻan mujāwazat hādhihi al-ummah al-alf / al-Suyūṭī.', '1. p.2-p.109 : al-Wasāʼil ilá maʻrifat al-Awāʼil / al-Suyūṭī.', 'Careful copy of two works by al-Suyūṭī (d.1505), namely al-Wasāʼil ilá maʻrifat al-Awāʼil, a work of miscellaneous historical notices relating to origins, inventors and inventions, condensing and expanding on al-Awāʼil of Abū Hilāl al-Ḥasan al-ʻAskarī (d. ca.1010), followed by al-Kashf ʻan mujāwazat hādhihi al-ummah al-alf, a treatise analyzing a spurious ḥadīth and addressing happenings at the end of time, lacking a few pages of text from the end.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 412', 'Origin: Lacks formal dated colophon ; paper, decoration, etc. certainly suggest 15th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "247 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" and "242" inscribed in pencil on interior of upper cover.', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in marbled paper with dark brown leather over spine, foreedge flap, and edges/turn-ins (marbled paper faced leather edged framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; board linings in laid paper ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; endbands gone apart from traces of primaries sewn through spine lining ; overall in extremely poor condition with significant losses of leather and paper, severe abrasion and pest damage, moisture damage, flap lost, spine lining exposed, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines grouped in threes with 9-10 mm. between chains and 41-47 mm. between groups (see p.28, 30, etc.), cloudy formation, quite sturdy, burnished ; much staining and tide lines ; many repairs including fills at edges of leaves and guards in manuscript "waste" (recycled paper) ; pp.117-122 on replacement leaves of different non-European paper with no chain lines visible.', 'Decoration: Fine illuminated frontispiece (pp.2-3) in double-page illumination carries the title and opening with upper and lower panels carrying the title and supplication for the Prophet ("كتاب وسيله النجات في مولد اشرف الموجودات عليه افضل الصلوات واكمل التحيات"), mainly in gold thuluth set in cloud bands of blue and red though the opening panel carries the first part of the title on a field of blue (approaching cobalt or lapis lazuli) overlaid with swirling vegetal decoration (arabesque) in orange and white, surmounted by a length of arabesque (black, orange-red and gold) and vertical stalks (tīgh), and flanked by a roundel (ansa) partly lost ; entire written area of frontispiece surrounded by a frame consisting of gold bands and blue rules and basmalah also chrysographed ; keywords (الله، محمد، الخ) and section headings throughout text chrysographed or rubricated ; overlining and abbreviation symbols in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Turkish hand ; mainly serifless (though left-sloping barbed head-serif appears on alif of lām-alif ligature), quite rounded with curvilinear descenders, some sweeping tails, very slight effect of tilt to the left, almost fully vocalized, گ represented by ك with three dots ; text of pp.108-121 supplied in at least two different hands.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 9 lines per page, divided to two columns to set off poetry ; section headings centered ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V-1 (9), 4 V(49), IV+1 (58), I+1 (61) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "كردلر سز بولسز اددن نجات عشقلادر ديله ايدك الصلات ... تنكردن يزبك درود يله سلام مصطفانك روحنه هر صبح شام اولسون آلينه دقى اصحابنه تابعين انصار وهم احبابنه امتندن راضى اولسون اول معين رحمة الله عليهم اجمعين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعل محمد [؟]... كل موجود واشرف كل مخلوق واعز كل مولود ... نحمده على ما جعلنا من امة محمد الوفي بالعهود واشهد ان لا اله الا الله وحده لا شريك له ولا شبيه له الذي تقدس ذاته عن زمن معدود ... هذا اول كتاب مولد المصطفى عليه السلام الله آدن ذكر ادالم اولا واجب الدر جمله اشده هر قولا ..."', 'Title from frontispiece (pp.2-3).', 'Ms. codex.', '3. p.112-p.121 : [further verses, ending with "كيم سليمان بلرسه بو وقتى مصطفاكيب مصطفى السر"].', '2. p.108-p.111 : Medh-i Mustafa.', '1. p.1-p.107 : Vesîletüʼn-necat / Süleyman Çelebi.', 'Fine (though damaged) early copy of the famous poem in praise of the Prophet by Süleyman Çelebi of Bursa (d.1422?) with preface in Arabic, followed by further verses supplied in different hands.'])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated, marginal corrections and finding aid in hand of copyist (same as that of Mich. Isl. Ms. 836,2).', "Date and copyist's name in colophon: tammat al-risālah ʻan yad mudarris-zādah al-sayyid Muḥammad Masʻūd al-[?] ... sanat 1166.", 'Pp. [2-15]. Bound with: [2] ʻAlī al-Malāqī al-Andalusī, al-Waḍʻ ʻalá al-jihāt fī al-basāʾiṭ wa-al-munḥarifāt, pp. [16-25]; [3] Mathematical calculations in Turkish, pp. [26-40]; [4] Jadwal aṭwāl wa-ʻurūḍ al-buldān ʻalá tartīb al-ḥurūf, pp. [41-68]; [5] Notes on geometry, astronomy and arithmetic, pp. [76-294].', 'A treatise on timekeeping in a muqaddimah and 25 bābs.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 407', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.584, transcription of Dīvān-i Khvājah-i Salmān completed 3 Ramaḍān 823 [ca. 11 September 1420], apparently by one Furṣat Gharīb. All other texts seemingly transcribed by the same copyist. As appears in colophon in margin on p.221, transcription of Dīvān-i Ḥāfiẓ completed 20 Ramaḍān 823 [ca. 28 September 1420].', 'Former shelfmark: "97 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "٢٢٧" on tail edge of text block.', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in fine silk textile (in red with green stripes defining rectangular panels containing floral motifs) with dark red leather over spine, fore edge, and edges / turn-ins (silk faced and leather edged framed binding) ; accompanied by slipcase faced in black coated and textured paper (embosed with scroll / interlace pattern) and edged in dark maroon leather, lined in printed marbled paper and fitted with yellow woven pull cord ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in bright red coated and textured paper (embossed with a scroll / interlace pattern virtually identical to that on the slipcase) ; decorative border on leather of upper and lower covers consisting of tooled and gold-painted band in chain pattern and gold and white-painted dome and stroke accents ; fore edge and envelope flaps are similarly decorated ; flap of slipcase carries contents ("اسامى ديوانچها كه در اين مجموعه ديوان سلمان حاشو ديوان حافظ ديوان كمال ديوان عصمت") with the four titles set among vegetal decoration (painted in gold, slate blue and white) ; gold-painted vegetal pattern on edges of text block ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and pink, in fair condition though tail band is detaching due to damage to primaries ; overall in fairly good condition with pest damage at spine, minor abrasion to fore edge flap, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical or horizontal, fairly indistinct) and no chain lines visible, cloudy formation, quite crisp, thin and trasluscent though sturdy, well-burnished ; staining and tidelines.', 'Decoration: Superb double-page illuminated at opening (pp.2-3) consisting of four rectangular pieces carrying verses in gold tawqīʻ and ornamented with delicate floral motifs and a border of lozenges mainly in blue, gold and white above and below the central written area (also bordered in lozenges with delicate vegetal designs in gold) ; further illuminated cartouches carrying headings (in particular at openings of dīvāns of Ḥāfiẓ, Kamāl, and ʻIsmat on pp.2, 222, and 474) appear in the margin ; additional illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of ghazals on p.380, consisting of rectangular piece with cartouche carrying heading in gold "غزليات مولانا جمال الدين سلمان" surrounded by delicate floral vegetal motifs in shades of blue, pink, white, gold, red, etc. on grounds of blue, black, etc. ; written area, margins and divisions within defined by narrow gold bands outlined by black fillets ; keywords and headings chrysographed ; textual dividers in the form of illuminated rosettes ; illuminated arabesques accent margins.', "Script: Naskh with elements of nastaʻlīq ; compact hand in a medium line ; virtually serifless and fairly vertical with elongation of horizontal strokes, some sweeping descenders, rāʼ somewhat elongated and slightly reversed, many closed counters, pointing mainly in strokes rather than distinct dots, occasionally kāf is written as vertical stroke with miniature kāf seated above (effect of the whole being resemblance to hamzah seated on alif), interesting form of dāl-rāʼ (در) in which rāʼ is nested in dāl and 'horizontal' stroke of dāl is angled and parallel to stroke of rāʼ ; most headings in an elegant, highly ligatured tawqīʻ.", 'Layout: Varies ; at opening of codex written with mainly 21 lines per page (divided into two columns) in the central written area and as many as 40 lines on the diagonal ; at close of codex written mainly in 14 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV-1 (7), 6 IV(55), III (61), 29 IV(293), ii ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes back flyleaf and skips two pages between pp.545-546).', 'Colophon: [Dīvān-i Ḥāfiẓ] "Scribal," reads "تم ديوان ملك الشعرا املح الكلام واوضح اللسان شمس الملة والدين محمد الحافظ الشيرازى طيب الله مضجعه ورحم الله له ولكاتبه ولناظره ولمن قال امين برحمتك يا ارحم الراحمين في عشرين من شهر رمضان المبارك لسنة ثلاث وعشرين وثمانمائة الهجرية م" ; [Dīvān-i Khvājah-i Salmān] "Scribal," triangular, reads "تم الديوان على يد الفقير الحقير اقل عباد الله المجيب فرصت غريب فى الثالث من رمضان المبارك لسنه ثلاث وعشرين وثمانمائه الهجرية ٨٢٣"', 'Incipit: [Dīvān-i Khvājah-i Salmān] "هر دل که در هوای جمالش مجال یافت عنقای همتش دو جهان زیر بال یافت ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from collation statement at close on p.584.', 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.474-p.549 : Dīvān-i Khvājah ʻIsmat / Khvājah ʻNaṣīr al-Dīn ʻIṣmat Samarqandī.', '3. p.222-p.473 : Dīvān-i Shaykh Kamāl al-Khujandī / Kamāl Khujandī.', '2. p.2-p.221 : Dīvān-i Ḥāfiẓ / Ḥāfiẓ.', '1. p.2- p.584 : Dīvān-i Khvājah-i Salmān / Jamāl al-Dīn Salmān Sāvājī.', 'Elegant majmūʻah containing an early copy of the Dīvān or collected poems of Jamāl al-Dīn Salmān Sāvājī (d.1376), the renowned panegyrist of the Jalāyirids, along with excerpts from the dīvāns of Ḥāfiẓ, Kamāl, and ʻIsmat on the ruled margins.'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Three crescents; Andrea Galvani of Pordenone. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), pp. 24 and 36 and no. 860.', 'Contains short tables.', 'Text rubricated; marginal corrections and notes in hand of copyist and others; on p. [1] is note: k[urrāsah] 2 ʻadad al-waraqah 22 ithnayn wa-ʻishrīn.', "End date from owner's mark on p. [13].", '"A treatise on the reckoning of the hours of prayer, abridged from the Risāla fī maʻrifat istikhrāj auḳāt al-ṣalāh by his father Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥaṭṭāb al-Mālikī." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 556', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.258, copied for himself by Maḥmūd ibn Sawindik ibn Khayr ibn Aman Ḥusayn [?] (Mahmut b. Sevindik b. Hayr b. Emen Hüseyin [?]) with transcription completed at the close of Ramaḍān 836 [May 1433].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- c. Slip with notes in Turkish (paginated pp.47-48) -- d. Slip with title and inventory number (paginated pp.107-108).', 'Former shelfmark: From front flyleaf and fore edge flap label "IL 415a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather with tan leather repairs at spine, fore edge flap and board edges ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings (doublures) in shell marbled paper (in pink, light and dark blue, white) now partially covered by flyleaves in brown wove paper (partially affixed to the boards) ; upper and lower covers carry a blind-stamped scalloped mandorla filled with vegetal decoration (compare Déroche class. NA 5) ; now sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and yellow, good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, lifting and losses of leather (particularly at foreedge flap which is detaching at lower cover), staining, etc. ; numerous repairs.', 'Support: non-European laid paper of perhaps several types ; mainly with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines visible but fairly indistinct and difficult to discern (possibly grouped in threes or threes and twos with 8-10 mm. between chains and 42 mm. between groups, see p.234), thick and now soft though well-burnished (some leaves till quite glossy) ; staining and tide lines ; some added leaves in European laid paper ; replacements leaves (see pp.149-166) on a European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (vertical), and crown-star watermark (see p.166 and compare no.70 in Nikolaev, Watermarks of the Ottoman Empire, vol.1), sturdy and well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke) rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, elegant hand in a narrow line ; virtually serifless and freely ligatured with slight inclination to the left, elongation of horizontal strokes, curvilinear descenders, tāʼ marbūṭah and hāʼ set down in foot / tail of preceding dāl, rāʼ, etc., final hāʼ and preceding rāʼ, etc. often assimilated, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf) but occasionally (in headings) represented by little kāf seated on vertical stroke (see p.93), pointing mainly in strokes rather than distinct dots ; text of replacement leaves (pp.149-166) in a Turkish naskh, partially seriffed, inclined to the left, pointing in conjoined dots or strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 4 (4), V-2 (12), V (22), 3 (25), 2 IV (41), 2 V(61), I (63), V (73), IV (81), IV+1 (90), 3 V(120), V-2+1 (129), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes added leaves and some inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمت الكتاب الوقاية بالعون والهداية على يد العبد الضعيف المحتاج الى رحمة ربه اللطيف محمود بن سوندك بن خير بن امن حسين [؟] اللهم اغفر لهم برحمتك يا عزيز يا رحمن في آخر الشهر المبارك رمضان من يوم الخميس [؟] في وقت الضحوة الكبرى في تاريخ سنة ست وثلاثين وثمانمائة كتبه لنفسه ولمن يقرأ من بعده"', 'Explicit: "وفي غنم مذبوحة فيها ميتة هي اقل تحرى واكل في الاختيار"', 'Incipit: "حمد من جعل العلم لجل [اجل] المواهب الهنية واسناءها واعلى المراتب السنية واسماءها ... وبعد فان الولد الاعز عبيد الله ... لما فرغ من حفظ الكتب الادبية وتحقيق لطائف الفضل ونكت العربية احببت ان يحفظ في علم الاحكام كتابا رائعا ولعيون مسائل الفقه راعيا مقبول الترتيب والنظام مستحسنا عند الخواص والعوام وما الفيت في المختصرات ما هذا شانه فالفت في رواية كتاب الهداية ... مختصرا جامعا لجميع مسائله ... موسوما بوقاية الرواية في مسائل الهداية ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.11.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Extensively annoted copy of the epitome on the celebrated work of Ḥanafī fiqh, al-Hidāyah by ʻAlī ibn Abī Bakr al-Marghīnānī (d. 1196 or 7) with table of contents (pp.3-4) and many notes and excerpts at opening and close of codex.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 44', 'Origin: As appears in scribal colophon on p.626, copied by ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Muḥammad al-Minshāwī al-Shāfiʻī al-Turābī [?]. Transcription finished ("wa-kāna al-farāgh min kitābat hādhihi al-nuskhah al-mubārakah...") 8 Ramaḍān 1058 [ca. 26 September 1648]. Authorial colophon on p.625-626 indicates that composition was completed 17 Rajab 955 [ca. 22 August 1548].', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 134. Kitab al-yawakit wa \'l-jawahir."', 'Binding: Textblock only, cover lacking ; traces of spine lining and spine leather ; sewing intact in yellow thread, two stations ; endbands in cream, intact ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; opening leaves of a type with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 25-28 mm. apart (vertical), tre lune (three crescents) watermark (about 83 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.1, etc.) ; next mainly another type with similar measurements and tre lune watermark (about 75 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.24, 80 etc.) with occasional leaves of a type with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 19-20 mm. apart and small watermark resembling a pot / jug / vase with two handles faintly visible (see p.20, 38, 144, 190, etc.) ; further along in the codex, another type with 6 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (vertical) and watermark of small hand / glove (see p.338, 516, etc.) ; another type with 25-28 mm. apart (vertical) and larger hand / glove watermark (see p.342, 528, etc.) ; toward end of codex, two other tre lune types (see p.580 and p.626) ; all well-burnished, smooth and glossy ; some leaves surface-dyed in yellow.', 'Decoration: Fine illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) on p.14 (incipit page) consisting of rectangular piece surmounted by semi-circular (dome) piece (approaching w-shaped piece) ; rectangular piece carries empty gold cartouche flanked by floral vegetal accents in gold, red, white and blue on fields of blue ; scalloped dome and accent pieces (practically forming w-shaped piece) filled with floral vegetal pattern in gold, red, and white on field of blue, outlined in gold, red and blue and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; headpiece is set in a well of red and gold bands with white dot accents ; written area of incipit and facing page bordered in frame consisting of a series of gold bands if varying thickness with outermost blue fillet ; elsewhere written area surrounded by red rule-border ; textual dividers in the form of red discs, inverted commas, etc. ; text rubricated and partially chrysographed with section headings, keywords, overlining, etc. in red, some in gold, and many keywords and headings also appearing in green, orange, brown, etc.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, likely Egyptian hand ; virtually serifless ; effect of slight tilt to the left ; mainly open counters, but some closed ; pointing in dots liberally spaced.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: II (4), V+1 (15), 30 V(315) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (begins with ۱ on p.15, facing incipit page) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between pp.349-350).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," rectangular, reads: "وليكن ذلك اخر كتاب اليواقيت والجواهر في بيان عقائد الاكابر جعله [؟] خالصا لوجهه الكريم ونفع به مؤلفه وكاتبه وسامعه والناظر فيه ... وكان الفراغ من تأليفه في يوم الاثنين المبارك سابع عشر رجب سنة خمس وخمسين وتسعمائة بمنزلي بمصر المحروسة بخظ بين الصورين قال ذلك وكتبه مؤلفه عبد الوهاب ابن احمد الشعراني الشافعي حامدا ومصليا ومسلما ومحيعلا ومحوقلا ومستغفرا والحمد لله رب العالمين..." ; "Scribal," triangular, reads: "وكان الفراغ من كتابة هذه النسخة المباركة في يوم السبت ثامن شهر رمضان المعظم سنة ثمانية وخمسين والف على يد العبد الحقير العاجز المذنب الفقير عبد الرحمن بن محمد المنشاوي الشافعي الترابي غفر الله له ولوالديه ولمن دعا لهم بالمغفرة ..."', 'Explicit: "فانظر يا اخي عناية التوحيد باهله فالحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "احمد الله رب العالمين واصلي واسلم على سيدنا محمد ... وبعد فيقول العبد الفقير الى عفو ربه ومغفرته عبد الوهاب بن احمد بن علي الشعراني عفي الله عنه هذا كتاب الفته في علم العقائد سميته باليواقيت والجواهر في بيان عقائد الاكابر حاولت فيه المطابقة بين عقايد اهل الكشف وعقائد اهل الفكر ..."', 'Title from titlepiece preceding table of contents on p.4.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of al-Shaʻrānī's elucidation of Ibn ʻArabī's ṣūfī doctrine as it appears in al-Futuḥāt al-Makkīyah."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 332', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.299, copied by Yārī al-Haravī with transcription completed 949 [1542 or 3].', 'Former shelfmark: "131 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap), two-piece binding with overlapping flanges visible at spine ; board linings in yellow-tinted gold-flecked laid paper, flyleaves in pink-tinted gold-flecked laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped (over red-brown onlays) and gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OAi 4) and pendants with gold-painted accents and tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; edges of text block gold-painted with floral designs ; sewn in dark pink thread, two stations, sewining failing (threads broken in several gatherings) ; worked chevron endbands in pink and pale yellow [?], god condition ; overall in fair condition with much abrasion, staining, some lifting of leather, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, not very distinct) and irregular chain lines faintly visible (unclear), cloudy formation, sturdy and fairly thick, well-burnished, medium beige in color, some leaves more yellow in color ; flyleaves in European laid paper with 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-29 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark (98 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) ; some breakthrough at frames, staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Exquisite double-page illumination at opening on pp.2-3 consists of large rectangular panels each divided to central rectangular panel carrying opening text set off by cloud-bands (in gold with floral accents, flanking panels filled with arabesque and floral accents in gold, red, yellow, white, etc. on fields of gold and lapis lazuli, and upper and lower rectangular panels with empty gold cartouches flanked by pendants and surrounded by elegant swirling arabesque with floral accents in turquoise, gold, red, white, lavender, and yellow on fields of gold and lapis lazuli evoking book cover design, upper and lower panels surrounded by border of heavy interlace and narrow white bands, entire rectangular panel surrounded by a series of gold lozenges and elaborate border (marginal decoration) with triangular piece or hasp (mainly in gold and lapis lazuli with swirling arabesque) at the center of each of the three outer sides set into an intricate arabesque design with floral accents on fields of gold, light blue, and lapis lazuli accented with perpendicular stalks [tīgh] ; written area throughout surrounded by frame consisting of a series of turquoise, gold, and blue fillets ; written area gold-flecked ; keywords and headings chrysographed.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; compact, elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 14 lines per page with written area divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, III+1 (7), 17 IV(143), III+1 (150),i ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, in Arabic, reads "تمت الكتاب على يد الفقير المذنب المهجور يارى الهروى سنه ۹۴۹ غفر ذنوبهما وستر عيوبهما م"', 'Explicit: "زبانرا گوشمال خامشی ده که هست از هر چه گوئی خامشی به بیادگار نوشتم خطی که ایامی بدین بهانه عزیزان کنند از میاد"', 'Incipit: "الهی غنچه امید بگشای گلی از روضه جاوید بنمای ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Exquisite copy of Yūsuf va Zulaykhā, the fifth of the seven mas̲navīs of Jāmī (d.1492) collected under the title Haft awrang.'])

en: (count: ['Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, hand, binding, etc. suggests late 15th or early 16th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "352 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" in pencil on final leaf (p.244).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in dark red leather with central scalloped mandorla of dark leather filigree over bronze shagreen onlays accented with gold outlines and rule border ; upper and lower covers stamped with scalloped, four-lobed central ornament and cornerpieces (all filled with vegetal compositions), outlined in gold and set off by gold-tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps (forming a chain) ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in light blue and cream, tailband gone, headband in tact ; overall in fair condition with some lifting and losses of leather, minor delamination, split joints, slight warping in boards, detaching at spine.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical, curved slightly and only somewhat indistinct) and irregular chain lines only faintly visible, thin and crisp, quite well-sized and burnished ; some tears, staining, etc.', 'Decoration: Red rubrics ; pages are bordered in blue and gold lines (contribution by D. Mancini-Lander).', 'Script: Text written in black nastaʻlīq script (contribution by D. Mancini-Lander).', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page with written area divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV-2 (6), 14 IV(118), II (122) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during digitization).', 'Explicit: "زبانرا گوشمال خامشی ده که هست از هر چه گوئی خامشی به"', 'Incipit: "نه بینم پخته زین بزم و خامی که بر کف باشد ش زان با ده جامی ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Yūsuf va Zulaykhā is the fifth of seven masnavīs (long poem in rhymed couplets) that make up Jāmī\'s Haft Awrang (Seven Thrones), composed in 888/1483. This manuscript is missing the first folio of the dibācheh. The first complete section begins: "be-nām-i ānkeh nām-esh..."(contribution by D. Mancini-Lander).'])

en: (count: ['This codex is undated, but the only stamp is dated 1311/1893-4. The cover design seems to have been done in the 19th century.', 'Exquisite codex assembled from painted and laquered board, which features the same realistic rose design on both covers. Spine is of plain leather. Both inside covers contain crude paintings of yellow flowers (daffodils?). Pages are bordered in gold paint. Chapter titles are written in red ink upon gilded designs, accompanied by colorful designs. Initial page with frontispiece with title is elaboritely decorated with gold paint and colorful designs. Both the main Persian text and Arabic prayers are written in black ink in tawki (or possibly thulth) script; Persian translation of prayers is written in red ink in nastaʻlīq script directly beneath the prayers.', "Prayers and pious observances for shiʻīs on ordinary and special days throughout the year according to the practice of the Imams. This book is largely divided into sections dealing with specific months of the year. The work is extracted from the author's large work, Bahār al-Anwār. The main body of the text is in Persian; the prayers themselves are in Arabic, with Persian translation."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 675', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.446, copied by Khalīl ibn Muḥammad (Halil bin Mehmet) with transcription completed in Istanbul during the first days of Rabīʻ II 1165 [February 1752].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label, "IL 418" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards now covered in blue coated, textured paper with dull red leather over spine and edges/turn-ins (traces of gold rule border visible) ; Type II binding (once with, flap now lost) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in brown surface-dyed wove paper ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; worked endbands damaged with cores exposed and tailband virtually gone ; overall in poor condition with much abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, loss of flap, etc.', "Support: European laid paper with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 20 and 21 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of lion rampant (see p.34, 35, etc.) and grapes under crown (see p.394, 395, etc.), thin, crisp and transluscent though sturdy, medium cream in color, well-burnished ; moisture damage in the upper outer corner of many leaves ; some pigment burn to breakthrough at the 'gilt' frame.", "Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.6 consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral motifs in white, pink, lavender, orange-red, and green on a gilt ground pricked here and there with three dots, surmounted by a scalloped w-shaped piece filled with swirling floral vegetal decoration of the same type on grounds of blue and gold (also pricked) and itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue with red accents ; entire piece set into a well of orange-red with a series of black crosses ; text of incipit and facing page set off by gold strokes, effectively crude 'cloud-bands' ; written area surrounded by 'gold' frame (gone to green on many leaves) ; keywords and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas ; occasional overlining in red.", 'Script: Naskh ; clear, compact Turkish hand ; virtually serifless with effect of tilt to the left, slight effect of words descending to baseline, mainly curvlinear descenders, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 21 V(210), VI (222), i ; quinions followed by a senion ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تم بعونه سبحانه وتعالى في اوائل ربيع الثاني لسنه خمس وستين وماء [مائة] والف بمحروسة دار السلطنة العلية القسطنطنية المحميه حماها الله عن عامه البليه وانا العبد الفقير خليل بن محمد عاملهما الله تعالى بالحسنى والزياده والحمد لله وحده"', 'Explicit: "اشتمال ايله اعلاى درجات امتيازده جلو كر قيلنمق شيوۀ خفيۀ تقديردن متسبعد [مستبعد] دكلدر"', 'Incipit: "يا رب سحاب فيضى باران ايله اول فيضله كشت كامى ريان ايله ..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of Nabi's continuation of Veysî's (d. 1628) work on the sīrah of the Prophet, Dürretü't-tac fî sîret Sâhibi'l-mirâc or Siyer-i Veysî. Contents listing on front flyleaf and 'title page' (pp.4-5)."])

en: (count: ["Date and copyist's name in colophon: waqaʻa al-farāgh fī al-yawm al-thānī ʻashar fī Shaʻbān al-muʻaẓẓam ʻalá yad ... Muḥammad ibn Yūsuf Bāshā ... li-sanat thalāth wa-ʻishrīn wa-miʾah wa-alf [i.e. 25 September 1711].", 'Text rubricated; marginal notes in another hand.', 'Commentary on al-Burdah, a poem by al-Būṣīrī in praise of the prophet Muḥammad.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 284', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, patronage, etc. would suggest mid 19th century. Inscription on front flyleaf and preface (fol.1a-1b/p.1-2) indicates that the composition was completed in the era of Muḥammad Shāh Qājār (r.1834-1848) under the patronage and direction of Ṣadr al-Mamālik Mīrzā Naṣr Allāh Ardabīlī (d.1854 or 5 ?).', 'Accompanying materials: Slip of wove paper with inscription in pencil "284 | Intikhāb az Dīvan | Ḳaṣā\'id Anvari. | Selections from | kasidahs of Anvari | early 19th cent."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather (sheep) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted paper ; upper and lower covers bear blind-tooled border consisting of a series of s-shaped stamps ; resewn making it difficult to assess the original sewing ; very fine chevron endbands in magenta and green ; in fair condition with much abrasion, even gashes, on covers ; spine leather is abraded, dry and cracking ; moisture damage ; much staining and general wear ; cover is beginning to detach from textblock at spine.', 'Support: European laid papers of a few types ; table of contents in European laid paper with chain lines running vertically spaced roughly 23 mm. apart, laid lines running horizontally spaced roughly 11-12 laid lines per cm., watermark circle with "IP" inside, orb and eagle above, in final folio of table of contents, watermark partially visible "...RTTI [?]" ; early through mid quires in European machine \'laid\' paper, chain lines running vertically spaced roughly 28 mm. apart, watermark "ALMASSO" and "GIOR MAGNANI" with scrollwork with eagle above tower (compare Heawood 3748) ; roughly last ten quires (from p.805) in European machine \'laid\' paper, chain lines running vertically spaced roughly 27mm. apart, watermark "POLLERI" and stag leaping above pond (stag springing or salient, or even courant), antlers in two lines.', 'Decoration: Magnificent illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) on incipit page consisting of rectangular panel with gold cartouche carrying the section title "انتخاب از دیوان قصاید انوری" bordered by an extremely elaborate frame forming a well filled with row upon row of semi-circular (dome) motifs accented by floral decoration (in red, orange, pink, blue, and white) and arabesque on fields of lapis lazuli and gold ; simple but compound frame consisting of various gold bands outlined by black fillets, second (bordering the margins) and third rules at some distance from the first ; on incipit and facing page, decorative vegetal border (arabesque) in gold surrounding columns of text ; cloud-bands in gold on incipit and facing page ; a few textual dividers looking like numeral khamsah ; floral decoration in ruled margin of incipit and facing page ; now illustrated with four miniature paintings, likely added later and obscuring text beneath, including: on fol.141a (p.281) scene showing pig herder with dog and pigs, in background church and astonished onlookers [2] on fol.211b (p.422) a hunting scene [3] on fol.276b (p.552) white-bearded man in the mountains with lion or leopard [4] on fol.320b (p.640) two men engaged in discourse ; section headings, keywords, and entries in table of contents rubricated. ; overlining and textual dividers in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; bold clear Persian hand ; characteristic descent of words to baseline though not heavily exaggerated ; contrast in thick and thin strokes, horizontal strokes quite heavy ; sans serif ; characteristic letterforms ; text of fol.473b-474a (p.946-47) in Arabic, supplied in a fine ىaskh, mainly serifless except for occasional alif of lam alif ligature, quite vertical, occasional sweeping descenders, fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 18 lines per page in the central column, 25-28 lines on the diagonal in the ruled margins ; single column often divided to two columns for setting off poetry, surrounded by margin ruled decoratively on the diagonal ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iii, I(2), 17 IV(138), III (144), 12 IV(240), IV+2(250), 29 IV(482), iii ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present in the lower left of the lower ruled margin, rarely slanting down ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Dedication: As attested in inscription on front flyleaf and in preface appearing before table of contents, composed under the patronage and direction of Mīrzā Naṣr Allāh Ardabīlī (d.1271 or 2 / 1854 or 5 ?), a Niʻmatallāhī dervish who also bore the title Nuṣratʻalī and was appointed to the office of Ṣadr al-Mamālik in 1259 [1843] (see Sefatgol, "The Safavid Model of State-Religious Administration," 78-79).', 'Explicit: " کای عمر تباه کتا پیشه تا چند زنی تو بپا تیشه شد عمر تو شصت و همان پستی وز باده ی لهو و لعب مستی "', 'Incipit: "حمد و سپاس و لغات لحنات [؟] ستایش بیقیاس شایسته اوراق مدایح خداوند یکانه و سزادار صحایف اوصاف معبود یست ... ای قاعده تازه ز دست تو کرم را دیمرتبه تو زبان تو قلم را"', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf and preface on fol.1a-1b (p.1-2).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of a work of selections from the works of various Persian poets, referred to as a taz̲kirah but more in the style of a jung, compiled under the patronage and direction of Mīrzā Naṣr Allāh Ardabīlī (d. 1854 or 5) by ʻAlī Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad Hamadānī. Opens with selections from Anvarī (d. 1189 or 90).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 520', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.24, composition completed 26 Ramaḍān 1059 [ca. 3 October 1649]. Brockelmann gives the date of composition as 1039 [1629] (GAL I 168 "XVI. Naṣāʼiḥ mit Cmt. Zubdat an-N. v. ʻOṯmān b. Muṣṭafá, voll. 1039/1629"). Date of transcription for this copy unspecified though paper suggests latter 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. (pp.1-2).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and label on lower cover, "IL 154" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Wove paper cover (green, single sheet, limp binding without boards) ; sewing damaged with threads broken or lost ; cover ill-fitting and in poor condition with significant staining, abrasion, tears, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), watermark of scrollwork / coat of arms with three bars (see p.8, etc. and compare Armoiries (16) A. Indéterminées dated 1673-1717 in Velkov, Les Filigranes dans les documents Ottomans) and "S S" under trefoil countermark (see p.15, etc. and compare nos. 233, 238, 246, 259, and 265a dated 1669-1684 in Nikolaev, Watermarks of the Ottoman Empire, vol. 1).', 'Decoration: Keywords and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; Turkish hand in a bold line ; virtually serifless with effect of tilt to the right, only very slight effect of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, some sweeping descenders, pointing in strokes, letterforms characteristic of nastaʻlīq.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V+1 (11) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," triangular, reads "تم تأليفه بين الصلوتين في اليوم السادس والعشرون [كذا] من شهر رمضان في سنة تسع وخمسين والف من الهجرة النبوية ... انك انت الوهاب تمت"', 'Explicit: "وان تموت بقلب سليم ان الله غفور رحيم استئناف تعليلي بحسن الظن وغلبة الرجاء الحمد لله حمدا كثيرا على الاتمام والصلوة والسلام على نبينا محمد واله الكرام"', 'Incipit: "لحمد لله الذي ارسل رسول محمد بالكتاب والسنة عليه الصلوة والسلام من الله والملائكة والامة ... اما بعد فيقول العبد الضعيف المذنب المعترف بالعجز والتقصير عثمان بن مصطفى المعلق بمحبة الله وحبيبه المصطفى لما كان نصائح الامام من جوامع الكلم اردت شرحها وكشفها بالكلم وسميته زبدة النصائح وقديما كان يختلج في صدري ان اشرحها ولكن لم يساعدني الزمان والآن نشاء سبب داع الى الشرح والبيان وهو الايجاء والالحاح من اختص الاخوان ..."', 'Title from opening on p.4.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Clear copy of a commentary on pious precepts (Naṣāʼiḥ al-Imām min jawāmiʻ al-kalim) attributed to al-Imām al-Aʻẓam, Abū Ḥanīfah al-Nuʻmān ibn Thābit (d.767).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 323', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.69, copied by Ibn ʻAli Quṭb al-Dīn al-Yazdī with transcription completed in the first part of Rajab 916 [October 1510].', 'Former shelfmark: "406 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in pink-tinted laid paper ; fore edge flap lined in green silk ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold-painted (on orange recessed inlays) rosette / mandorla (filled with vegetal composition vaguely reminiscent of Déroche class. OAi2 1) and cornerpieces along with tooled rosettes and gold-painted accents and border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, dirty, tailband damaged ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather at spine and fore edge flap, minor pest damage, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, faint and indistinct) and no chain lines clearly visible, well-burnished, beige in color ; staining and tidelines ; many bifolia guarded with recycled manuscript "waste" ; flyleaves in European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Elegant (though damaged) illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of large rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying the title in white ("ديوان مولانا شاهي") surrounded by swirling vegetal decoration in black, cartouche surrounded by swirling floral vegetal designs in gold, yellow, red, white and pink on a field of blue with gold accents, surmounted by triangular piece or hasp with upper most pendant and vertical stalks (tīgh) continuing floral vegetal design on gold and lapis lazuli ; written area (and columns within) surrounded by a gold frame defined by black fillets and outermost blue rule ; centered panels of written area left blank.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; compact, elegant Persianate hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 12 lines per page with written area mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 2 III(12), II (16), III (22), V (32), II (36), i ; ternions, binions, and a quinion ; catchwords present ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals through "٢٩" ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, mainly in Arabic, reads "تم هذه الابيات العبد الفير الى الطاف الصمدى ابن على قطب الدين اليزدى غفر ذنوبه وستر عيوبه في اوائل رجب المرجب من شهور سنه ست عشر وتسعمائة الهجره النبويه المصطفويه عليه افضل الصلوات واكمل التسليمات"', 'Explicit: "سخن تا چند گویم پیچ هر [در] پیچ ترا من دوست میدارم دگر هیچ "', 'Incipit: "ای نقش بسته نام خطت با سرشت ما این حرف شد ز روز ازل سر نوشت ما ..."', 'Title from illuminated headpiece at opening on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Dīvān of Amīr Shāhī, Aq Malik ibn Amīr Jamāl al-Dīn Sabzavārī (d.1453).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 614', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. may suggest late 17th or early 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. (pp.1-2). -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. (pp.3-4)', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 113" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Boards covered in block-printed paper (pinwheel with star pattern in blue and black on a white, blue-spotted ground) with dark brown leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted paper ; sewn in dark blue thread, four stations ; worked chevron endbands in brown and yellow, good condition ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal and vertical, varies) and occasional single chain lines visible (see p.12, 70, etc.) ; medium cream in color, transluscent, sturdy and well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and some abbreviation symbols rubricated ; occasional overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Persianiate hand ; virtually serifless with curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots, occasional sweeping tails, etc. ; glosses in nastaʻlīq.', 'Layout: Written in 6 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, IV-1 (7), 11 IV(95), IV-1 (102), ii ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and some flyleaves).', 'Explicit: "قاتبع منها لأقوى والزم ما هو اقرب الى التقوى والحمد لله على نعمائه والصلوة علي سيد انبيائه واشرف اوليائه وهذا صورة خط المصنف رحمه الله تعالى"', 'Incipit: "والحواس والصلوة على افضل من ارسله لتبليغ الاوامر والنواهي ... صلوات الله عليهم ما دامت الفروع مترتبة على الاصول والاجناس منقسمة بالفصول وبعد فيقول راجي عفو ربه الغني محمد المشتهر ببهاء الدين العاملي تجاوز الله عنه هذا يا اخوان الدين ما توفرت عليه دواعيكم وتكثرت اليه مساعيكم من متن متين محرر الفصول يتضمن خلاصة علم الاصول فخذوا اليكم زبدة وجيزة موصولة الى كنوزه ونخبة غريزة مطلعة على رموزه ... ورتبته على خمس مناهج ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine [though acephalous and lacking at end] copy of Bahāʼ al-Dīn al-ʻĀmilī's (d.1621) concise work on ʻilm al-uṣūl (uṣūl al-fiqh), extensively annoted."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 682', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.161, opening work copied by Derviş Mehmet ( Darwīsh Muḥammad / درويش محمد ) with transcription completed 11 Shawwāl 1107 [ca. 14 May 1696]. Transcription of other works likely completed around the same time, even early 18th century. Ijāzah (by the author, authorizing one Muḥammad ibn ʻUmar to transmit the work) at close of al-Ḥikam al-ʻirfānīyah dated 3 Muḥarram 970 [ca. 2 September 1562] in Mecca (possibly transcribed by the copyist verbatim from the exemplar).', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Two inventory cataloguing slips in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- c. Insert carrying glosses (paginated pp.129-130) -- d. Scrap with note and seal impression (paginated pp.153-154).', 'Former shelfmark: From inscription on inner front cover and spine label, "IL 153" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in laid paper (perhaps once marbled) with brown leather over edges/turn-ins (likely spine and fore edge flap as well, though now lost); Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; sewn in heavy cream and magenta thread, six stations ; overall in quite poor condition with flap lost, severe abrasion and staining, lifting and losses of leather, paper and boards, delamination of boards, etc. ; repairs to spine in light brown leather ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; mainly with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of three hats (see p.10, 11, 214, 215, etc.) and scrollwork / arms with "P A" and/or balance [?] inside (see p.6, 15, etc.), thin and transluscent though sturdy, cream in color, well-burnished to glossy ; several other types including those with crown above grapes (raisin) watermark (see p.152, 155, etc.), "M F" (p.170, etc.), name (p.178, etc.), and grapes (p.180, 182, etc.) ; some moisture damage with losses of text (in some areas, resupplied, see p.63, etc.).', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and some abbreviation symbols (two-teeth stroke, some signes de renvoi, etc.) rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas, red discs, etc. ; some overlining in red.', "Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) and naskh ; three main Turkish hands ; Zübdetü'l-fuhûs in nastaʻlīq (talik) an elegant Turkish hand, characteristically serifless with effect of tilt to the right and of words descending to baseline, elongation and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, letterforms characteristic of nastaʻlīq (talik) ; Silsiletü'z-zeheb and following menakıb (as well as many of the glosses throughout) supplied mainly in a clear Turkish naskh, partially but irregularly seriffed with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline, curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots ; hand changes at p.170 to a similar but seemingly different Turkish naskh, more compact and in a thinner line, partially but irregularly seriffed (with right-sloping head-serif), some elongation of horizontal strokes, slight effect of words descending to baseline and of tilt to the left, free assimilation of letters ; final work supplied in still a different Turkish naskh, elegant, compact and serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, elongation of vertical strokes.", 'Layout: Written in 19, 21 and 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: 7 V(70), V-1 (79), V+1 (90), 2 V(110), V-2 (118) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in red and then black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes some inserts).', 'Colophon: [Zübdetü\'l-fuhûs] "Scribal," triangular, reads "الحمد لله على اتمام هذه النسخة الشريفة من يد احقر العباد درويش محمد في وقت الضحى من شوال المكرم في يوم الحادى عشر سنه سبع مائة والف غفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه م م" ; [al-Ḥikam al-ʻirfānīyah] "Authorial," triangular, reads "... هذه الحكم العرفانية للشيخ محمد بن عمر واجزته ... وانا الفقير علي بن حسام الدين وكان ذلك في مكة المشرفة ضحوة يوم الخميس ثالث شهر الله الحرام المحرم من شهور سنة سبعين وتسعمائة والحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على سيدنا محمد واله اجمعين م"', 'Incipit: [Zübdetü\'l-fuhûs] "حمد لا يعد ولا يحصى وشكر بى همتا وبى منتها اول عليم حكيم اولان خداى ذو العطايه كه فصوص قلوب ارباب خصوصى نقوش حكمت وزيب وزيور معرفت ايله مزين ومحلى قلوب ... اما بعد بو عليل وغليل وفقير وذليل اعنى شيخ اسمعيل المولوى الانقروى ... واول حضرتك اغمض تصنيفاتندن واجمل تأليفاتندن برى نقش فصوص ... اما اول حضرتك شرحى دخى الفاظ عربى وعبارات فارسى ايله اختلاط وامتزاج ايلدوكى اجلدن اكثر طالبه استنباط واستخراجى عسرت وصعوبتدن خالى دكلدر پس بو ذليل قليل البضاعة عبارت تركيده بر اسلوب جديد اوزره شرح وبيان ايتمكى ... وبوكا زبدة الفحوص في نقش الفصوص ديمكله نام ونشان ويردم ..." ; [Silsiletü\'z-zeheb] "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام على خير خلقه محمد واله اجمعين بو رساله اولدر كه طريق نقشبنديده اولان ويردلرين واجازتلرين بيان ايدر ..." ; [al-Ḥikam al-ʻirfānīyah] "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على سيدنا محمد خاتم الانبياء وسيد المرسلين واله وصحبه اجمعين اما بعد فيقول احقر عباد الله علي بن حسام الدين الشهير بالمتقي هذه حكم عرفانية في معان [معاني] ارشادية واشارات قرآنية ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. composite codex.', '4. p.206-p.239 : al-Ḥikam al-ʻirfānīyah / ʻAlī ibn Ḥusām al-Dīn ibn ʻAbd al-Malik al-Junbūrī al-Hindī, al-shahīr bi-al-Muttaqī.', '3. p.168-p.205 : [manāqib (menakıb) pertaining to various Naqshbandī masters including Saʻd al-Dīn Kāshgharī, ʻUbayd Allāh Aḥrār, Ḥasan ʻAṭṭār, etc. possibly constituting (even with the preceding silsile) excerpts from a Turkish rendering of Rashaḥāt-i ʻayn al-ḥayāt by Fakhr al-Dīn Ṣafī ʻAlī ibn Ḥusayn Kāshifī].', "2. p.162-p.167 : Risalet Silsiletü'z-zeheb li's-sâde en-Nakşbendiye.", "1. p.1-p.161 : Zübdetü'l-fuhûs fî Nakşi'l-Fusûs / İsmail Ankaravî.", "Fine collection (majmūʻah / mecmua) opening with the Turkish commentary by İsmail Ankaravî on Ibn al-ʻArabī's (d.1240) Naqsh al-Fuṣūṣ, an abridged version of Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam, followed by a silsile (silsilah) for the Naqshbandīyah order and menakıb (manāqib) of several masters, possibly constituting excerpts from a Turkish rendering of Rashaḥāt-i ʻayn al-ḥayāt by Fakhr al-Dīn Ṣafī ʻAlī ibn Ḥusayn Kāshifī (d. ca.1532), and concluding with a collection of maxims, precepts and companion verses from the Qurʼān compiled by ʻAlī ibn Ḥusām al-Dīn al-Muttaqī al-Hindī (d.1567). Contents listing for opening work on 'title page' (p.1)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 822', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely of Northern Indian production, perhaps 18th century.', 'Binding: Unbound gatherings once sewn in yellow thread, two stations (now mostly gone) ; scrap from a Turkish newspaper apparently once wrapped around spine ; in somewhat poor condition with tears and staining, lifting and losses of paper, etc. ; housed in wrapper and envelope for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical or horizontal, varies, curving and sagging) and no obvious chain lines visible ; quite thin, crisp and transluscent though sturdy, dark cream in color, well-burnished ; losses, tears, staining, etc.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular band of swirling vegetal decoration with floral motifs in lavender, red and green on a gold ground, surmounted by rectangular piece with cartouches carrying the basmalah, etc. ("بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم رب يسر وتمم بالخير"), all surmounted by scalloped w-shaped piece filled with floral vegetal decorations in white, green, red, pink, etc. on grounds of dark blue and gold ; written area of incipit and facing page set off by interlinear gold bands (reminiscent of cloud-bands) and surrounded by frame in gold, red, blue and black rules ; elsewhere triple rule-border in red and blue with outermost blue rule defining margins ; keywords and headings rubricated, others overlined in red ; roughly 16 diagrams (see pp.18, 20-22, 134-135, 137-138, 142, 158-161) mainly executed in black and red or yellow ink ; roughly 25 illustrations or miniatures, none full-page (see pp.21-22, 46-48, 50-51, 58, 125-130, 164-168, 178) ; in p.78 lacuna left for illustration never supplied.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; careful Indian hand in a medium to bold line ; serifless, with marked effect of words descending to baseline, some elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV+1 (9), IV-2 (15), IV (23), V (33), III (39), IV-1 (46), 4 IV(78), IV+1 (87), V (97) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Incipit: "العظمة لك والكبرياى جلالك اللهم يا قايم الذات ومفيض الخيرات واجب الوجود وواهب العقول ... اما بعد هميگويد اصغر العباد زكريا محمد بن محمود الكموي القزوينى ... که چون بحکم الهی مفارقت اهل و وطن اتفاق افتاد ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine though incomplete copy of a Persian rendering of al-Qazwīnī's (d.1283) famous cosmography ʻAjāʼib al-makhlūqāt wa-gharāʼib al-mawjūdāt, illustrated with roughly 25 miniatures and 16 diagrams."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 637', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.108, transcription completed 9 Shaʻbān 1246 [ca. 23 January 1831]. As appears in preceding authorial colophon (also on p.108), composition completed 5 Rabīʻ II 1030 [ca. 27 February 1621].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.1-2) -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 247" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark red cloth ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in light blue-green wove paper ; upper cover bears gold-stamped title "العرف الندي" ; resewn in white thread, eight stations ; overall in good condition.', 'Support: European laid paper in at least two types ; one type with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents and "I M C" watermarks (see p.16, 17, 38, 108, 109, etc.) ; another type with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), and crescent with face watermark (see p.62, etc.) ; all well-burnished, fairly stiff and sturdy ; some staining and tears ; repairs in wove paper.', 'Decoration: Keywords, some abbreviation symbols (stroke over keywords), and passages of text being commented upon rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs or inverted commas.', "Script: Naskh ; two clear Turkish or 'Syrian' hands ; opening hand (through p.26) a naskh, mainly serifless (though very slight right-sloping head-serif appears on some free-standing alifs) with curvilinear descenders, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots, medial hāʼ sharply mudghamah, kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred (even final kāf, without hamzah-like miniature kāf), bowl of final nūn fairly wide with point set just inside ; following hand (p.27 through close) a slightly more elegant naskh, partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serif mainly on free-standing alif (also occasional joined alifs, lām of definite article, etc.), tilt to the left, elongation in the vertical, curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots, initial hāʼ in nice wajh al-hirr (more pointed, with path of the penstroke quite evident), final kāf without shaqq and with hamzah-like miniature kāf.", 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, II-1 (3), II (7), III (13), II (17), 3 (20), 3 V(50), I (52), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," reads "قال مؤلفه رحمه الله تعالى ورضي عنه فرغت منه يوم الجمعة المبارك خامس شهر ربيع الثاني لسنة ثلاثين والف من الهجرة النبوية ه" ; "Scribal," triangular, reads "وكان الفراغ من نسخه يوم الاحد المبارك تسعة مضت من شهر شعبان المعظم الذهو من شهور سنة ۱۲٤٦ ستة واربعون ومائتين والف من الهجرة امين م"', 'Explicit: "وقد تقدم انها من بحر الرمل وتقدم تفصيله وفي هذا القدر كفاية ونسأل الله ان يتقبل منا ذلك وان يسلك بنا احسن المسالك ... انك سميع قريب مجيب الدعوات يا رب العالمين وسلام على المرسلين والحمد لله رب العالمين ه"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي نسج في الازل شقة النصيحة باعتزال ذكر الاغاني والغزل ... وبعد فان القصيدة الوردية اللامية المنظومة من بحر الرمل ووزنه فاعلاتن فاعلاتن فاعلاة ثلاث مرات المسماة بنصيحة الاخوان ومرشدة الخلان ... وكنت ممن اطلع عليها مرارا عديدة وفي كل حين يظهر لي منها فوائد جليلة وقد حاولت نفسي المرة بعد المرة ان اكتب عليها ما فيه للعيون قرة ... وشرعت في شرح لطيف يحل الفاظها ... وسميته العرف الندي في قصيدة بن الوردي ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.7) and opening matter (preface) on p.9.", 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy of the commentary by ʻAbd al-Wahhāb al-Khaṭīb al-Ghamrī (fl. 1621) on Zayn al-Dīn Abū Ḥafṣ ʻUmar ibn Muẓaffar Ibn al-Wardī's (d. 1349) qaṣīdah called al-Lāmīyah or Naṣīḥat al-ikhwān wa-murshidat al-khillān, a moral poem of 77 verses in the ramal metre."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 626', 'Origin: As appears in colophons on p.23, 42, and 185 copied for himself ("ʻallaqahā li-nafsih") by Abū Bakr ibn Aḥmad ibn Ibrāhīm ibn Muḥammad ibn Ismāʻīl Ibn al-Ṣārim (ابو بكر بن احمد بن ابراهيم بن محمد بن اسماعيل ابن الصارم) with transcription of the poem [al-ʻUnqūd] completed 4 Rajab 834 [ca. 18 March 1431] and transcription of the poem and its commentary completed 14 Shaʻbān 834 [ca. 27 April 1431]. A notice for the copyist appears on p.186, identifying him as a merchant (tājir) of Sūq Jaqmaq and indicating that he was born in 807 [1404 or 5], died 14 Jumādá II 888 [ca. 20 July 1483], and was buried in Bāb al-Ṣaghīr in Damascus.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From recto of opening leaf (p.1) and spine label, "IL 209" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though envelope flap now missing, only fore edge flap remains) ; doublures and interior of foreedge flap in brown leather with block-stamped vegetal composition (arabesque) ; upper and lower covers carry exquisite blind-tooled strapwork design with gold-tooled accents covering the entire panel, bordered rules outlining a series of s-shaped stamps and centered on a twelve-pointed star filled with a repeated rectangular pattern formed of a small lozenge-shaped stamp ; the same pattern fills the cornerpieces and elsewhere a small triangular stamp has been used to form the effect of a more detailed interlace pattern ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; endbands virtually gone ; overall in poor condition with upper cover fully detached, fore edge flap detaching, envelope flap lost, significant abrasion, lifting and losses of leather (particularly at spine), some delamination of boards, staining, wax drips on lower doublure, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm running horizontally (visible though often quite faint) and chain lines running vertically in groups of three (or groups of three and two) with 9-11 mm. between chains and roughly 42-50 mm. between groups ; stiff and thick though crisp, well-burnished, fairly smooth, dark cream with some inclusions.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, some vocalization, and text being commented upon rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas (three or six) in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear though angular Syrian hand in a thin to medium line ; partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs appearing mainly on free-standing alif and occasional initial lām, hooked serif on shaqq of kāf, effect of tilt to the right, many open counters, pointing in distinct dots, ihmāl sign on in the form of v-sign on letter sīn ; more compact and of thinner line in Sharḥ al-ʻUnqūd ; some passages vocalized, mainly text of al-ʻUnqūd.', 'Layout: Written in 11-12 lines per page ; hemistiches of al-ʻUnqūd in lines alternately justified to the right and left ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: III-1 (5), 8 V(85), III+2 (93) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization ; paginated with central bifolium of final quire lifted out and placed at end of textblock, hence mistaken pagination (i.e. p.178 is followed by 183, 184, 185, 186, 179, etc.) reflected in digitial object.', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '8. p.186 : [notice for the copyist, Abū Bakr ibn Aḥmad ibn Ibrāhīm Ibn al-Ṣārim].', '7. p.183-p.185 : [continuation of Sharḥ al-ʻUnqūd fī naẓm al-ʻuqūd].', '6. p.179-p.182 : [birth and death notices].', '5. p.44-p.185 : [Sharḥ al-ʻUnqūd fī naẓm al-ʻuqūd].', '4. p.43 : [originally left blank, now carries birth notice, reading/study statement, etc.].', '3. p.24-p.42 : [al-ʻUnqūd fī al-naẓm al-ʻuqūd] / Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd Allāh al-Mawṣalī al-Khalīlī.', '2. p.12-p.23 : [al-ʻAwāmil al-miʻah, or Miʻat ʻāmil] / ʻAbd al-Qāhir ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Jurjānī.', '1. p.1-p.11 : [poetic excerpt followed by an extensive listing of birth and death notices].', "Clear copy of al-ʻAwāmil al-miʼah [Miʼat ʻāmil], ʻAbd al-Qādir al-Jurjānī's (d. 1078?) popular manual of Arabic grammar, followed by al-ʻUnqūd, the metrical treatise (urjūzah) on Arabic grammar by Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd Allāh al-Mawṣalī al-Khalīlī (d. 1334 or 5), followed by an anonymous commentary. A large number of birth and death notices are included throughout the codex."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 883', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.433, transcription completed in Tabrīz, 23 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1242 [ca. 18 July 1827].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) No Husselman or Meredith-Owen notes" (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Recyled card with note in hand of Emilie Savage-Smith [?] "19th c. Persian" (paginated pp.3-4) -- c. Slip with note "Counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" (paginated pp.5-6) -- d. Slip with title and date "ʻeyn-ol-bokā | Copied in Tabriz 1242 AH" (paginated pp.7-8) -- e. Page torn from 1913 catalog of Luzac & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, with description and price listed for this manuscript and others "II.-PERSIAN AND HINDUSTANI MSS. ...166 Ainul-buka. By Muhammad Taki bin Ahmad of Borujand. A work on the Tragedy of Imam Husain, composed A.H. 1199. Persian MS. on glazed paper in fair Nastaʻliq hand ; 2 inks. Small folio. Leather bound. 203 folios. Copied in Tabriz, A.H. 1242. £ 1 1S." (paginated pp.9-10).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 32', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather with red leather over spine, head edge and fore edge of upper board and corners of lower board (likely repairs) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted wove paper ; sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and cream, good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with much abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: European machine laid paper with chain lines spaced 25-26 mm. apart (vertical), \'laid\' lines in a faint mesh or cross-hatch, and watermarks of scrollwork having eagle above tower within, "T G" below and crown above, as well as "GAGGIERO" (see p.12, 14, 16, 20, etc. and compare no.3740 in Heawood), sturdy and well-sized and burnished, cream in color ; fills and other repairs in wove paper.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; overlining in red ; textual dividers in the form of four dots or inverted commas.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, free assimilation of letters, many large, sweeping descenders ; some descenders reversed / recurved.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 26 IV(208), II+1 (213) ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and skips two pages between p.77-78).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "تمام شد این کتاب عین البکا در روز سه شنبه در بیست و سوم شهر ذی حجة الحرام در دار السلطنة تبریز در سنه هزار دویست چهل دو از هجرت ... نبوى ..."', 'Explicit: "ویا حبیب قلوب العابدین تمام شد این کتاب عين البکا"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذی خلقنا بلطفه من الماء والطین وجعلنا بکرامت من الامة سید المرسلین ... اما بعد اصل هر کلام ... و این نسخه را موسوم بعین البكکاء کرد اینده ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.13.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of what is apparently the abridgment (mukhtaṣar) of the author's work on the martyrdom of Imām Ḥusayn."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 999', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 148', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark blue textured cloth with dark blue leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "العلم والعرفان" ; sewn in white thread over three recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands in brown ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Wove paper of at least two different types (and cut to different sizes), ruled and unruled.', 'Decoration: Text of opening and closing sections entered in a pinkish red ink.', 'Script: Ruqʻah and naskh ; opening and closing sections in a quick, compact hand in a thin to medium line , serifless and freely ligatured with effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed ; central section in first an elegant modern naskh (see pp.98-142), and then a heavy ruqʻah (see pp.142-172).', 'Layout: Written mainly in 15-20 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, V (10), IV (18), VII (32), VI (44), II (48), VI (60), VII (74), IV (82), 4 (86), III (92), i ; catchwords present in opening sections (through p.95) ; pagination in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals through p.8 ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "ولما كانت الموارد اربعة كان العرش محمولا على اربعة اركان"', 'Incipit: "قال الله تعالى ومن يؤت الحكمة فقد اوتى خيرا كثيرا وقال صلى الله عليه وسلم الحكمة يمانية والعلم يمان اشراة الى انهما آتيان من قبل القوة النظرية فانها الجهة اليمنى والتي منها اليمن والبركة ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on opening 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. composite codex.', 'Careful copy a selection of philosophical extracts and commentary in sections under the headings al-ʻIlm wa-al-ʻirfān (see p.1), Sharḥ qiṭʻah min awwal al-Fuṣūṣ al-ʻArabīyah (see p.56), al-ʻĀlam wāḥid (see p.65) and Shudhūr min al-Fann al-rubūbī min Funūn al-ḥikmah al-ʻulyā (see p.98). Sections from the opening text appear also in the final transcript (e.g. compare text of p.7 and p.121 under the heading "انقسام العلم على النظري والعلمي").'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 218', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.71, composition completed ("wa-kāna al-farāgh min jamʻ hādhihi al-risālah wa-tartībihā...") 17 Jumādá I 1301 [ca. 15 March 1884] in Istanbul (دار الخلافة العثمانية) ; transcription likely soon after.', 'Former shelfmark: "508 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "212" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.3).', 'Binding: Only dark brown spine leather remains of cover original to textblock ; currently slipped into an ill-fitting (too large) cover with pasteboards covered in tan (to olive green, see flap) leather, though upper cover now lost ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in red leather with scalloped mandorla and pendants in gold-painted filigree leather appliqué over red, blue and green paper, along with tooled and gold-painted accents and border ; flyleaves in seafoam green surface-dyed wove paper with gold-painted border ; upper and lower covers bear exquisite gold-stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition reminiscent of Déroche class. OAi2 7), pendants and cornerpieces, with gold-tooled accents and border in a series of oval stamps ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn in green thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in green and gold, intact ; overall in rather poor condition with upper cover lost and lower cover and flap completely detached, lifting and losses of leather, abrasion, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper (Persian?) with 10-12 laid lines per cm. with some curving and sagging ; very highly burnished to glossy ; crisp though sturdy ; dark cream in color.', "Decoration: Exquisite illuminated titlepiece on 'titlepage' (p.3) consisting of upper and lower rectangular panels carrying the title lettered in gold and a central diamond-shaped panel carrying the ex libris, accented by superb swirling floral vegetal decoration (gold, red, green-blue, etc.) in further upper and lower rectangular panels and in the area surrounding the central diamond shape ; elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening of text on p.5 consisting of tall, vaguely w-shaped piece with two additional small domes filled with a swirling floral vegetal design in pink, white, green, gold, etc. on a field of gold ; entire piece is set in a well filled with floral vegetal design in gold, pink, white, and green and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in red and deep blue (lapis lazuli or cobalt) ; incipit and facing page carry illuminated marginal decoration in the form of a border of swirling vines and flowers entirely in gold ; written area of incipit and facing page accented by gold cloudbands ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of heavy gold band outlined by gold and black fillets ; illuminated textual dividers in the form of rosettes, florets, knots, discs, etc. with red and green accents, no two on a page alike in composition ; keywords, hadith excerpts, etc. chrysographed ; edges of the textblock gilded (gilt).", 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand, very well-executed ; partially serifed with right-sloping head-serif on ascenders of lām, ṭāʼ, etc. but not on free-standing alif ; mainly open counters ; curvilinear descenders ; rightward descenders tapered ; pointing in distinct dots, liberally spaced ; some elongation of horizontal strokes ; partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, VI (12), 2 V(32), II (36), i ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Dedication: Lengthy statement following titlepiece and preceding opening (see pp.4-5).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," rectangular, reads: "وكان الفراغ من جمع هذه الرسالة وترتيبها في اليوم السابع عشر من شهر جمادى الاول سنة الف وثلاثمائة واحد في دار الخلافة العثمانية ايام دولة امير المؤمنين وخليفة رسول رب العالمين سلطان سلاطين البسيطة من قاص وداني مولانا السلطان الغازي عبد الحميد خان الثاني خلد الله تعالى ملكه امين"', 'Explicit: "وان يحب لهم ما يحب لنفسه من الخير ويكره لهم ما يكره لنفسه من الشر وان يذب عن اموالهم واعراضهم وان يحثهم على التخلق باخلاق الله ورسوله اقتداء بما كان عليه السلف الصالح وهذا اخر ما وفق الله تعالى لاملائه وجمعه والحمد لله اولا واخرا ظاهرا وباطنا والصلاة والسلام على خاتم النبوة وعلى جميع النبيين وعلى جميع عباد الله الصالحين"', 'Incipit: "ان ازهى ما تزينت به وجنات الطروس وازكى ما تعطرت به الارواح وانتعشت به النفوس حمد من رتب نظام العالم ببدائع غرائب حكمته ... وبعد فيقول العبد الفقير احمد بن محمد الخماش النابلسي اني ممن بلي بمعانات الاسفار والرحلة من دار الى دار وقد حبب الله لي اجتناء ثمرات الاخبار ... ولهذا طالما يلوح في خاطري ... بان اخدم الدين الحنفي والامة المحمدية بخدمة يعود نفعها على عموم اهل الملة الاسلامية ... فشرعت في جمع آيات قرآنية واحاديث نبوية دالة على افتراض طاعة اولى الامر من الملوك والسلاطين واتبعت ذلك بنبذ شريفة من علم السياسة وسميت هذا المؤلف المختصر بالعقد المنظم في افتراض طاعة الخليفة الاعظم ورتبته على مقدمة وبابين وفصلين وخاتمة ومن الله استمد القبول والتوفيق انه ولي ذلك"', 'Title from titlepiece on p.3 and opening on p.10.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of a collection of Qurʼānic verses and traditions (aḥādīth) on the duty of obedience to rulers and principally the Ottoman sultan as holder of the 'caliphate,' spiritual leader for Muslims and defender of Islam. Compiled and arranged by Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad al-Khammāsh al-Nābulusī on the order of Sultan Abdülhamit II (1842-1918, r.1876-1909)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 109', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.114, transcription of the sharḥ by ʻAlī al-Qūshjī completed 3 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1113 [ca. 1 May 1702] ; paper suggests that other works were copied around the same time, even late 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Inserted slip bearing glosses (paginated pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 61. Two commentaries on Al-Risalat al-wadiyah."', 'Binding: Pasteboards (very thin, semi-limp) covered in marbled paper (mainly in white and shades of blue) with brown leather over spine and edges/turn-ins (marbled paper faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in European laid paper ; sewn in light pink thread, four and two stations ; overall in fair condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper in a few different types ; text of first work on type with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of flower on stem with leaves ; next work on another type with laid lines spaced 7-8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark ; final works on still another type with 14 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 20 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of bar carrying name/initials with grapes ; all types well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Abbreviation symbols and keywords rubricated ; overlining in red ; text of the sharḥ by ʻAlī al-Qushjī surrounded by frame consisting of a gold band flanked by black fillets.', 'Script: Naskh and naskh-nastaʻlīq ; at least three different hands ; all virtually serifless with elongation of horizontal strokes ; naskh freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, final yāʼ and alif maqṣūrah mardūdah, and pointing in curved lines rather than distinct dots ; naskh-nastaʻlīq shows slight effect of words descending to baseline and letterforms characteristic of nastaʻlīq.', 'Layout: Written in 15, 21 and 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 2 V(20), IV (28), III (34), V-1 (43), V (53), I+1 (56), III (62) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '8. p.121-p.126 : [blank].', '7. p.118-p.120 : [Risālah fī al-waḍʻ].', '6. p.116-p.118 : Sharḥ al-Sayyid al-Sharīf lil-qāḍī ʻAḍud al-Dīn / al-Jurjānī.', '5. p.115 : [blank].', '4. p.72-p.114 : [Sharḥ al-Risālah al-waḍʻīyah] / ʻAlī al-Qūshjī.', '3. p.70-71 : [blank].', "2. p.69 : [originally blank, now carries a listing of the author's works].", '1. p.2-p.68 : ʻIṣām al-Dīn ʻalá al-Waḍʻīyah / ʻIṣām al-Dīn Ibrāhīm ibn Muḥammad al-Isfarāyīnī.', "Fine copy of three of the principal commentaries on al-Ījī's seminal treatise in ʻilm al-waḍʻ, al-Risālah al-waḍʻīyah, namely that of ʻIṣām al-Dīn al-Isfarāʼinī (d.1537), ʻAlāʼ al-Dīn ʻAlī al-Qūshjī (Ali Kuşçu, d.1474), and ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad al-Jurjānī, al-Sayyid al-Sharīf (d.1413). Followed by a brief anonymous treatise on the same subject."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 409', 'Origin: According to colophon on p.276, copied by the Ottoman historian Mustafa Naima (مصطفى نعيما / Muṣṭafá Naʻīmā, d.1716) with transcription of opening sections completed in the final days of Rajab 1120 [October 1708] ; inscription on front flyleaf (p.1) also indicates that the mecmua is in the hand of Naima, "مجموعۀ نفيسه با خط مرحوم المبرور نعيمآى باهر الفضائل رحمه الله" as does the inscription on the head edge of the text block "مجموعۀ غريبه با خط نعيما افندى" ; date of 1123 [1711 or 12] appears on p.341 and date of 1121 [1709 or 10] appears on p.500.', 'Former shelfmark: "76 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf (p.2) ; "٢١٧" on tail edge of text block.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap), two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; doublures in brown leather with tooled and gold-filled central ornament following the outline of the stamped lozenge and pendants on each cover and filled with floral motifs, set off by gold-tooled accents and gold-painted borders ; upper and lower covers carry stamped (recessed onlays in red leather) and gold-painted central lozenge (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition) and pendants, as well as gold-tooled accents and border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in blue and pink, tailband gone, headband damaged with some losses ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, etc.', 'Support: European and non-European laid paper (most gatherings composed of bifolia in both) in several types ; main European type with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-29 mm. apart (horizontal) and watermark of crown above cartouche with initials (difficult to make out) and diamond-shaped medallion reminiscent of grapes below (see p.58, 246, 298, 436, 484, 498, 510, etc. and compare Raisin no.6 in Velkov, Les Filigranes dans les documents Ottomans, appearing in ms. copied in Istanbul 1710) ; other watermarks include mount of six coupeaux with "GB" [?] below (see p.502, 506, etc.) and crown above cartouche with "PSD" and grapes (raisin) below (see p.518 and compare Raisin nos. 7-8 in Velkov, Les Filigranes dans les documents Ottomans, appearing in mss. copied in Istanbul 1711) ; main non-European type with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly indistinct) and no chain lines visible ; all quite well-sized and burnished, mainly cream or dark cream with some leaves tinted blue or yellow ; staining and tidelines.', 'Decoration: Headings and keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs, hāʼ, etc. ; in some sections, written area and columns within surrounded by a gold frame outlined in black fillets.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Turkish / Ottoman hand in a medium line ; serifless with slight effect of inclination to the right, gentle descent of words to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, mainly closed counters, pointing mainly in conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Varies, though mainly in as many as 27 lines per page, divided to two columns ; elsewhere in as many as 41 lines across the diagonal ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V+1 (11), VI (23), II+1 (28), III+1 (35), IV (43), IV+1 (52), 6 V(112), III+1 (119), 6 V(179), IV (187), IV+1 (196), 4 V(236), V-1 (245), V (255), V-1 (254), V (264), i ; many quinions ; numerous lacuna, with many leaves left fully or partially blank between sections ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "قد وقع الفراغ من تسويده على يد عبد الفقير مصطفى نعيما عامله الله بلطفه العميم وذلك فى اواخر رجب الفرد سنه ١١٢٠"', 'Title from rubricated inscription on opening leaf (p.3).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of a collection (mecmua / majmūʻah) of poetic extracts in Persian and Ottoman Turkish, apparently compiled and copied by the Ottoman historian Mustafa Naima (d.1716), opening with selections from the Dīvān of Mīrzā Muḥammad ʻAlī Ṣāʼib Tabrīzī (d. between 1080/1669-70 and 1088/1677-8). Later additions in at least two other hands.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 337', 'Origin: As appears in closing matter (colophon including patronage statement) on pp.676-7, executed for Fatḥ ʻAlī Shāh Qājār (1769-1834, r.1797-1834) ("ḥasaba al-amr amīr bī-naẓīr... Fatḥ ʻAlī Khān, al-shahīr bi-Bābā Khān, Qājār Quvānlū ... sawwadahu wa-nammaqahu..."), apparently before his ascension to the throne, by Ibn Muḥammad Taqī al-Sāravī Muḥammad (author of Tārīkh-i Muḥammadī, still living in 1802) with transcription completed 23 Jumādá I 1203 [ca. 19 February 1789]. Statement dated Rabīʻ I 1232 [January-February 1817] on \'title page\' (p.3) names the copyist and indicates that the manuscript was presented to the Imperial Library.', 'Former shelfmark: "432 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" and "١۷" inscribed in pencil on opening leaf (p.1, serves as flyleaf) ; possible inventory inscription on fore edge of text block.', 'Binding: Heavy pasteboards covered in painted lacquerwork with spine in dark gray leather ; Type III binding (without flap), two-piece binding (overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; upper and lower doublures in fine painted lacquerwork of a central medallion evoking a four-petalled flower and pendants of vegetal design in gold on a red ground, framed in gold ; upper and lower covers bear paintings of nearly identical composition with entire panel virtually filled with swirling vines in yellow / gold, leaves of green and grapes of dark red on a pale orange ground, surrounded by vegetal borders in gold on dark red and green grounds ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red, cream and [?] (now gray), good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion and losses to lacquerwork and pasteboard, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; opening type with 13 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 19-22 mm. apart (vertical) and watermarks of "FC" under scalloped crown (see p.8, etc.) and shield with lion rampant, "F" below and scalloped crown above (see p.10, 14, 16, etc.) ; next type with 11-13 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 22 mm. apart (vertical), and watermarks of smiling lion passant guardant with "F" below (see p.12, 20, 22, etc.) and "FC" only (see p.26, 28, etc.) ; next (and majority) type with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 19-21 mm. apart (vertical), and watermarks of "FL" under scalloped crown (see p.98, 120, 360, 680, etc.) and three hats (see p.100, 154, 184, 340, 488, etc.) ; all highly sized and burnished, thin and crisp though quite sturdy.', 'Decoration: Splendid illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.4 consisting of rectangular panel with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral motifs and swirling vegetal design in gold, red, blue, and white on fields of blue and red, surmounted by scalloped w-shaped piece filled with swirling vegetal design and floral motifs in green, lavender, orange, red, pink, and yellow on a blue and gold ground with outline and accents in white and black, all set in a well of blue with white accents ; rich illuminated marginal decoration (including inner margin) on incipit and facing page (pp.4-5) consisting of elaborate swirling floral vegetal design in green, orange, yellow, pink, lavender, and light blue on a gold ground, on incipit page (p.4) surrounding a domed medallion in gold carrying the name of Fatḥ ʻAlī Shāh Qājār ("السلطان فتحعلي شاه قاجار"), possibly added later upon his ascent to throne ; additional exquisite double illuminations at openings on pp.342-343 and 344-345, including headpieces and marginal decoration (on pp.344-345, marginal decoration includes birds in pink, blue and orange) ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by frame of red with gold accents, gold cloud-bands setting off the text, and vertical bands of blue and red arabesque framing the columns ; written area elsewhere surrounded by frame of gold bands defined by black fillets (columns and divisions within written area also defined by gold bands and black fillets) ; keywords and section heading rubricated ; occasional textual dividers in the form of three or four red discs.', 'Script: Shikastah (shikastah-nastaʻlīq / شكسته نستعليق ) ; elegant Persian hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in roughly 19 lines per page, with written area mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV (8), 34 IV(280), V+3 (293), 2 III(305), III+1 (312), 3 IV(336), II (340) ; Chiefly quaternions ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," including patronage statement, in Persian and Arabic, reads "حسب الامر امیر بی نظیر زیبنده تاج و سریر ... فتحعلی خان الشهیر ببابا خان قاجار قوانلو خلد الله سلطانته باتمام این کلیات واختتام این ابیات معجز آیات پرداخت ... سوده ونمقه العبد المحتاج الى الله الصمد ابن محمد تقى الساروى محمد في يوم الاربعا ثالث عشرون شهر جميدى الاول من شهور سنه ۱۲۰۳"', 'Explicit: "اگر که گاه بودی محتشم را نکته آموزی"', 'Incipit: "نفیر مرغ سحر خوان چو شد بلند صدا پرید زاغ شب از روی بیضه بیضا ..."', "Title from statement on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Splendid copy of the Dīvān of Muḥtasham-i Kāshānī (d.1587 or 9) executed by Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad Taqī Sāravī for Fatḥ ʻAlī Shāh Qājār (1769-1834, r.1797-1834) before his accession to the throne.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 501', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on pp.260-261, copied by Ḥasan [?] ibn al-Ḥājj Muḥammad al-Kattānī [al-Kinānī?] with transcription completed 17 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1235 [ca. 25 September 1820]. Date composition was completed ("وكان الفراغ من جمعه .") is given as the first part of Jumādá II 985 [August 1577] which conflicts with claims in Kaḥḥālah, etc. for a death date of 980 [1572] for the author.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.1-2) -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.3-4) -- c. Inventory cataloguing slip with transcription of the colophon (pp.5-6) -- d. Inventory cataloguing slip for Isl. Ms. 570 (pp.7-8).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 253" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in block-printed paper (red and yellow vegetal guilloché interlace designs over blue) with brown leather over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins (framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in red-violet wove paper ; sewn in white thread, two stations, gone or broken in many quires ; worked chevron endbands in red and cream, only headband intact ; overall in fair condition with some pest damage, minor abrasion, lifting of paper, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-28 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark (65 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.12, etc.) ; sturdy though crisp, burnished ; some pest damage and minor ink burn.', 'Decoration: Keywords, headings, and text being commented upon rubricated ; simple red and yellow ruled rectangular piece carries basmalah at opening ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by frame of yellow and red rules, elsewhere surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Maghribī ; elegant hand with slight effect of tilt to the right and characteristic alif of prolongation, sweeping descenders, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 20 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 13 V(130) ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and mistakenly skips two pages each between pp.123-124 and 179-180).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," reads " وكان الفراغ من جمعه في اوائل جمادى الاخير عام خمسة وثمانين وتسع مائة والحمد لله ... والصلاة وعلى نبيه المصطفى صلى الله عليه وسلم" ; "Scribal," reads "وكان الفراغ من نسخه يوم الاثنين بعد العصر سبعة عشر خلون من ذي الحجة في عام خمسة وثلاثين ومائتين والف على يد كاتبه ... العبد الفقير الحقير ... حسن ابن الحاج محمد الكتاني [؟] غفر الله له ولوالديه ولمشايخه ... وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم انتهى"', 'Explicit: "وهو قول ابن نافع وبالله تعالى التوفيق انتهى قد كمل هذا التعليق المبارك على المختصر الرشيد لسيدنا الشيخ الولي الصالح العالي العلامة العارف بالله ابا زيد عبد الرحمن الاخضري ... على يد جامعه ... عبد اللطيف بن محمد المرادي [؟] هو الشهير بابن المسبح ..."', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي اعلى معالم الاسلام ... وبعد فاني قصدت ... التعليق شرح مختصر الشيخ الفقيه العلامة ولي الله سيد ابي زيد سيد عبد الرحمن الاخضري ... وسميته بعمدة البيان في فرائض الاعيان ..."', 'Title from opening on p.10.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of a commentary by ʻAbd al-Laṭīf ibn Muḥammad al-Murādī [al-Mirdāsī?], al-shahīr bi-Ibn al-Musabbiḥ, on Mukhtaṣar fī al-iʻbādāt, a popular elementary treatise on ritual duties according to the Mālikī school by Abū Zayd ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Akhḍarī.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 869', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, etc. would suggest 17th century. Chronogram at close of dīvān on p.375 "اتمام يافت" may suggest date of composition of 973 [1565-6].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) Husselman notes" -- b. Slip with description (in hand of E. Husselman ?) "Mushfiqī, Bukhārī | Dīvān | BMC. Cat. Pers. MS. Suppl. has a Mushfiqī, Bagdadī in a Tazkirah of ancient & modern Persian poets. No Bukhārī found. Apparently we do not have | 190 ff. 379 pp." -- c. Slip with note "counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" -- d. Tag with "#10"', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 18', 'Binding: Boards faced in blue-green cloth with dark green leather over spine (straight grain) and board corners (approaching half-binding) ; Western style-binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in shell \'marbled\' paper (mainly in brown, blue and pink) ; leather extending on upper and lower covers gold-stamped with toothed borders ; spine gold-stamped with decorative bands and title and author "DIWAN | I | MUSHFIKI | I | BUKHARI" ; sewn in white thread over three recessed cords (visible at spine) ; overall in somewhat poor condition with severe spine slant (cocked), spine leather detaching, abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian or Persian) laid paper with roughly 6-7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal or vertical, indistinct, some curving) and no chain lines plainly visible, cloudy formation, thin and transluscent though sturdy, dark cream in color, well-burnished ; some pest damage, staining and tide lines ; extensive repairs.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.4 consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral motifs in red, yellow, green, etc. on grounds of blue and gold, surmounted by a set of scalloped domes (nearly evoking w-shaped piece) filled with swirling floral vegetal decoration in shades of pink, red, blue, orange, yellow, white, etc. on grounds of gold and blue, all set in a well of yellow, gold and orange bands with red accents and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area (and divisions within) surrounded by gold frame defined by black fillets with outermost blue rule ; occasional section headings rubricated (mainly toward the close of the codex).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless with gentle effect of tilt to the right and of words descending to baseline, marked elongation and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes (contrasting with thin vertical strokes), pointing in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: Heavily repaired with original gatherings difficult to discern though middle of the quire marks appear for some gatherings (black stroke in the lower outer corner of the right-hand leaf) ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords only rarely visible (typically cut off) ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (center of upper margin of the recto of each leaf) ; pagination in heavy pencil, Western numerals (upper outer corner of the verso of every other leaf) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inner flyleaves and skips two pages between pp.5-6).', 'Explicit: "که با شد بآ کاهی انجام من"', 'Incipit: "این نامه که روی در سیاهی دارد بیهوده خلل نامتناهی دارد ... نموده می شود که راقم این سواد مشفقی المروی ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Dīvān of the Tajik poet Mushfiqī (ʻAbd al-Raḥmān, d.1588) with qaṣāʼid, ghazalīyāt, muqaṭṭaʻāt, rubaʻīyāt, etc. as well as his brief mas̲navī Sāqī-nāmah (pp.375-381).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 403', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.427, copied by Shujāʻ al-Dīn Muḥammad Shīrāzī with transcription completed in Shaʻbān 989 [September 1581].', 'Former shelfmark: "229 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf (p.2) ; "٤٠" on front flyleaf (p.1) ; "٦٩٧" on spine label.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in dark red leather with central mandorla and cornerpieces in gold-painted leather filigree appliqué over blue paper, pendants in black filigree appliqué over gold leaf, as well as gold-painted accents ; upper and lower covers carry stamped (with once gold-painted recessed onlays in dark red leather) mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OSd 3), pendants, cornerpieces and border lozenges ; design continues on flap ; sewn in dark pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, poor condition with tailband entirely gone and headband significantly damaged with losses of threads and core exposed ; overall in poor condition with much abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, fore edge flap detaching, etc. ; numerous repairs in another dark red-brown leather (at edges, spine / rebacked, joints, hinges / rehinged, etc.).', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct, some curving) and occasional pairs of chain lines only faintly visible, somewhat cloudy formation , some inclusions, quite sturdy, well-burnished, dark cream to beige in color ; later flyleaves in European laid paper ; breakthrough at frames in many leaves ; numerous repairs (fills, guards, etc.).', 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.6, consisting of large rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche surrounded by elegant arabesques with floral accents in gold, red, yellow, and light blue on a lapis lazuli ground and bordered in a bands of red and heavy gold interlace, surmounted by a large scalloped w-shaped piece filled with delicate arabesques in gold, light blue, yellow, red and white on grounds of gold and lapis lazuli divided by bands of white and turquoise to a series of scalloped dome or diamond shapes, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) and set in a well of light blue and gold ; another exquisite illuminated headpiece (rectangular piece surmounted by scalloped dome set in heavy band) at opening of section on p.108 ; written area surrounded by a frame consisting of bands of red, turquoise, and gold defined by black fillets with outermost blue rule, divisions within (some gold-flecked) defined by narrow gold bands outlined with black fillets ; keywords and headings chrysographed ; textual dividers in the form of gold discs.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, with written area often divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 6 IV(48), II (52), 20 IV(212), I (214), ii ; almost exclusively quaternions ; leaves between sections left blank (pp.102-107) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "فرغ من تمت الديوان نجاتي عليه الرحمة فى يوم السبت شهر شعبان المبارك سنه ٩٨٩ تسع وثمانين وتسعمائه عن يد الفقير الحقير شجاع الدين محمد شيرازى"', 'Explicit: "دنيا ايچنده باغ ارم كورمك استين سورسن يوزن مزارنه اول يوجه حضرتك"', 'Incipit:"بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم اولدى چو عنوان ديوان قديم كلوكز اولالم كه وبى كاه ذاكر لا اله الا الله ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Dīvān of Necâtî Bey (İsa) Edirnevî (d.1509).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 422', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, etc. suggest latter 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "479 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in shell marbled paper (mainly in red and blue) ; upper and lower covers carry gold-stamped scrollwork designs with central lozenge, corner motifs and vegetal border, gold-stamped designs continue on spine ; now sewn in white thread over two recessed cords, four stations ; stuck-on endbands in green ; register in sheer silk ribbon ; edges of text block gold-flecked ; overall in fair condition with damage to upper board corner, minor abrasion, some negative draw in covers, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 18-21 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of scrollwork with three stylized hats in shield and "F C" below (see fol.5, 6, 15, 16, etc.), sturdy and quite well-burnished to glossy, alternating bifolia tinted yellow.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of "منشآت" on fol.1b, consisting of scalloped w-shaped piece filled with swirling floral vegetal decoration in light green, pink, light blue, white, red, and gold on grounds of gold and dark blue, bordered in white, black, gold, red and blue bands, surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and red and set in a well of pink with red accents ; other fine illuminated headpieces at opening of "صلحيه نمچه" on fol.49b, opening of "تقريضات" on fol.69b, opening of "قصائد" on fol.71b, opening of "تخميسات" on fol.79b, and opening of ghazals on fol.84b ; written area surrounded by gold frame, with divisions within defined by narrow gold bands outlined in black fillets ; keywords rubricated ; overlining in red ; textual dividers in the form of gold discs.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; fine, compact hand in a heavy line ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, with written area mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 12 V(120), V-1 (129), i ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present.', 'Incipit: "حركت كردن از شتائيه بطرف صيفيه وبعد ازين نقل كردن بجنات محبوبيه جناب برارنده نه طباق افلاك جل ذاته عن درك الادراك ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page'.", 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Dīvān (collected verse and prose) of the Ottoman Grand Vizier and littérateur, Koca Mehmet Ragıp Paşa (d.1763), opening with münşeat. Contribution to the cataloguing from Hossein Mottaghi.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 342', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.421, copied by Maqṣūd ʻAlī Shīrāzī with transcription completed in Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1106 [July-August 1695].', 'Former shelfmark: "123 T. D. M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather (pebbled, in style of shagreen) with red-brown leather over edges / spine (possibly repairs or at least added later) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in dark red brown leather with central mandorla in gold-painted filigree appliqué (composition with two birds) over blue paper as well as pendants and gold-painted border ; outermost flyleaves in marbled paper (mainly blue and green) ; upper and lower covers carry stamped (with recessed onlays) and gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal composition having crane-like bird at center) and pendants, as well as tooled and gold-painted borders ; now sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, quite good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with upper cover fully detached at joint, lower cover almost fully detached at joint, much abrasion, some lifting and losses of leather (filigree, etc.) ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and no chain lines clearly visible, cloudy formation, well-burnished, thin and transluscent, crisp though sturdy ; in latter quires, another type with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, more distinct, curved) and irregular chain lines in pairs (see p.222, etc.).', 'Decoration: Splendid illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of qaṣāyid on p.2 consisting of large rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying title in white ("قصاید صایب سلمه الله تعالى") surrounded by elegant vegetal composition in gold, orange-red, yellow, lavender, white, etc. on fields of lapis lazuli, red, and turquoise with white and black accents, surmounted by w-shaped piece filled with swirling vegetal composition in gold, orange-red, yellow, white, lavender, turquoise, etc. on fields of lapis lazuli and gold, all set in a well of blue, red and white ; incipit and facing page carry fine illuminated marginal decoration consisting of swirling vegetal compositionwith sāz leaves and floral motifs mainly in gold with lapis lazuli, red and turquoise accents ; text of incipit and facing page set off by gold cloud-bands ; written area (including columns within) throughout surrounded by gold frame defined by black and outermost blue fillets ; another splendid illuminated headpiece at opening of ghazalīyāt on p.16 (with written area, mounted in replacement leaf).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 14 lines per page, with written area mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, IV-1 (7, opening leaf pasted down), 16 IV(135), III (141), 8 IV(205), IV-1 (212), ii ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between p.215-216).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," mainly in Arabic, reads "تمت الغزليات قدوة المتأخرين حضرت صايب الملقب به مستعد خان سلمه الله تعالى بتاريخ شهر ذي حجه الحرام سنه ۱۰۶ كتبه الفقير مقصود على شيرازى تم"', 'Incipit: "تا نگردیدست خورشید قیامت آشکار مشت آبی زن بروی خود ز چشم اشکبار..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the collected poems (mainly qaṣīdahs and ghazals) of Mīrzā Muḥammad ʻAlī Ṣāʼib (d.1676?).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 341', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, etc. would suggest 18th century. Dated ownership statements on 'title page' (p.1) supply terminus ante quem of 1758.", 'Former shelfmark: "443 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "٨٥" inscribed on tail of text block.', 'Binding: Pasteboards now fully covered in spring-green silk faced / backed with lavender paper (covered boards faced and lined, i.e. silk fully wraps apparently already leather-faced boards as with an overcover / slipcover, compare Isl. Ms. 343) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; flyleaves in dark lavender surface-dyed and gold-flecked laid paper (10 laid lines per cm. / horizontal, chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart / vertical, and watermark of three crescents / 95 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) ; upper and lower covers bear traces of stamped mandorlas beneath the textile and paper (likely in leather facing, which is also visible under the textile and paper) ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and yellow, good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with some staining, abrasion, lifting and losses of cloth and paper, etc. ; somewhat ill-fitting (small), particularly fore edge flap and upper cover.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; one type with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 22-26 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of grapes (raisin) with crown above (see p.67, etc.) ; another type with 12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of grapes (raisin) under crown and "PF" (see p.28, 35, 72) ; all well-sized and burnished, sturdy, thin and transluscent ; some leaves tinted bright yellow, pale green, pale pink, lavender, etc.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) filled with swirling vegetal design and floral motifs in pink, red, white, blue, and turquoise on fields of gold and blue, set in a well of dark turquoise and gold and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in pink, blue and red ; vegetal motifs in gold accent written area of incipit and facing page (pp.2-3) ; written area surrounded by heavy gold frame, columns within and occasionally margins also outlined in gold rules ; margins in opening quire gold-flecked ; some abbreviation symbols rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; fine though initially somewhat careless Ottoman hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes ; highly ligatured ; possibly a different hand supplying the latter portion of the codex.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page with written area mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled (occasionally margins also ruled).', 'Collation: i, 6 V(60), I (62), V-1 (69), 16 V(229), VI (241), 20 V(441), IV (449), 5 V(499), IV+1 (508), i ; chiefly quinions ; several sections (pp.119-120, 128-138, 441-460, 572-582, 890-899, 918-919) and final leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; poems numbered in Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages each between pp.10-11, 67-68).', 'Incipit: "دل نگردید شب وصل تهی از گلها [گله ها] طی شد این وادی و هموار از نشد آبلها [آبله ها] ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the voluminous collected poems of Mīrzā Muḥammad ʻAlī Ṣāʼib (d. between 1080/1669-70 and 1088/1677-8).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 7', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.1178, copied by Ḥasbī Sulaymān ibn Aḥmad ibn Ḥasan al-Arzanjānī in Erzincan. Transcription finished mid-Rajab 1177 [January 1764].', 'Accompanying materials: Roughly ten inserted slips, most carrying glosses, some tipped in, all paginated (see pp.17-18, pp.49-50, pp.51-52, pp.107-108, pp.523-534, pp.885-886, pp.893-894, pp.895-896, pp.1151-1152, pp.1163-1164).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 49. Anwar al-tanzil." ; possible former shelfmark on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in deep red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures and interior of flap in brown leather ; upper and lower covers bear large, blind-stamped, scalloped mandorla with symmetrical vegetal composition (compare Déroche class. OSd 9) ; upper and lower doublures carry gold-painted outline of scalloped mandorla with pendants ; along with gold-painted roll border consisting of a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations ; fine chevron endbands in yellow and blue ; in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, ill-fitting flap, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper in at least two types ; the first type with roughly 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines spaced 26-28 mm. apart (vertical), watermarks include grapes with initials and crown and "P P [?]" countermark ; a second type with roughly 13 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 22 mm. apart (horizontal), watermarks include lion rampant in scrollwork with crown above ; thin, crisp and fairly transluscent, though sturdy.', 'Decoration: Fine illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) on fol.1b (p.10) consisting of rectangular piece surmounted by semi-circular piece (dome) ; rectangular piece (surrounded by interlace border in lavender) carries empty gold cartouche flanked by floral vegetal accents in gold on fields of blue; semi-circular piece (set in a well of interlace in blue and black) contains floral motifs in gold and red on fields of blue, bordered in gold, red and blue and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue with red accents ; written area (and margin) of incipit and facing page outlined in gold frame, thereafter written area bordered in red rule-border ; text rubricated with keywords, overlining, sigla other abbreviations, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Turkish / Eastern Anatolian hand ; partially seriffed with right-sloping (nearly horizontal) head-serif appearing often on lām of definite article ; rounded though adhering to baseline (apart from occasional superscripting) ; very slightest effect of tilt to the left.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, V+1 (11), 4 V(51), V+1 (62), V (72), IV+1 (81), 22 V(301), VI (313), 12 V (433), V+1 (444), 14 V (584), iv ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, begins with first folio of text proper, continues with numerous mistakes (e.g. skips ۸۲, repeats ۲۳۷ then skips a leaf, etc.) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and inserts, skips two pages between pp.493-494 and between pp.529-530, drops from p.899 to p.890).', 'Cololphon: "Authorial," rectangular, reads: "قال المصنف ... قد اتفق اتمام تعليق سواد هذا الكتاب المنطوي على فرائد قواعد ذوي الاباب ... الموسوم بانوار التنزيل واسرار التأويل وهو سبحانه حقيق بان يحقق الرجا" ; "Scribal," rectangular then triangular, reads: "الحمد لله الذي وقفنا بخدمة كتابه المبين ... قد من الله تبارك وتعالى باتمام هذا الكتاب المستطاب بيد الفقير الى رحمة ربه العليم وشفاعة نبيه الكريم حسبي سليمان بن احمد بن حسن الارزنجاني ... بمدينة ارزنجان حماها الله ... في اواسط رجب المبارك لسنة سبع وسبعين ومائة والف ... اعننا الله فيما يحبه ويرضاه لا اله الا الله محمد رسول الله"', 'Explicit: "من الجنة والناس بيان للوسواس او الذي او متعقلق يتوسوس اي يوسوس في صدورهم من جهة الجن والناس وقيل بيان للناس على ان المراد به ما يعم القبيلتين ... فكانما قرأ الكتب التي انزلها الله تعالى"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي نزل الفرقان على عبده ليكون للعالمين نذيرا ... وبعد فان اعظم العلوم مقدارا وارفعها شرفا ومنارا علم التفسير الذي هو رئيس العلوم الدينية ورأسها ومبنى قواعد الشرع واساسها ..."', 'Title from authorial colophon.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of al-Bayḍāwī's celebrated commentary on the Qurʼān. Table of contents, listing of commentaries upon the work, and biographical sketch for the author included at opening."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 364', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, etc. would suggest 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip of paper with descriptive notes in pen in hand of G. Meredith-Owens "364 | Dīvān of Ṣāʼib | Probably late 18th century | Contemporary binding | Copied probably in Turkey" (not paginated) -- b. Numerous inserts carrying excerpts and glosses (paginated pp.5-6, 9-10, 15-16, 19-20, 25-26, 29-30, 33-34, 39-40, 45-46, 51-52, 55-56, 63-64, 77-78, 91-92, 97-98, 151-152, 163-164, 169-170, 173-174, 179-180, 183-184, 187-188, 189-190, 193-194, 205-206, 209-210, 213-214, 217-218, 221-222, 225-226, 235-236, 241-242, 247-248, 253-254, 257-258, 363-366, 493-494, etc.).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in tan leather ; Type II binding (with flap, now detached) ; doublures in red-brown leather with central lozenge and pendants outlined in gold and flecked with silver, as well as gold-tooled border and rosette and stroke accents ; upper and lower covers carry exquisite stamped (with gold-painted red leather recessed onlays) central lozenge and pendants (filled with symmetrical vegetal design incorporating cloud bands, red-painted, compare Déroche class. NSd), along with gold-tooled accents and a heavy guilloché roll border in gold ; design continues on flap ; edges of text block gold-painted with vegetal designs ; sewn in pink thread, two stations, sewing failing ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, damaged with core of headband exposed ; overall in somewhat poor condition with flap fully detached, lifting and losses of spine leather and lining, minor pest damage at spine, spine split through toward center of text block, minor abrasion, staining, etc. ; repair to upper joint in mauve textile ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of perhaps a few types ; mainly with 11-12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 20-22 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of grapes (raisin) below cartouche and crown (see p.84, 104, 122, 124, 198, 199, etc.) ; another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of lion statant guardant (see p.280-281, 384-385, etc.) ; another type with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of a lion [?] passant with curled tail ; all thin and crisp though sturdy, well-sized and burnished to glossy, mainly light cream in color with a few leaves tinted pink, yellow, etc.', 'Decoration: Superbly executed illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche (oriented vertically) set in a scalloped dome overlaid with exquisite swirling floral vegetal motifs in shades of pink, blue, red-orange, yellow, white and gold on grounds of black, gold and slate blue with turquoise accents, all set in a well of narrow gold bands flanking a heavy light blue band with dark blue crosses and surmounted by a row of vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and red ; second illuminated headpiece at opening of final section on p.534 (opens "نه احتیاج که ساقی ویرا شراب سنکا ..."), consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche surmounted by scalloped dome overlaid with elegant floral vegetal motifs in gold with white, turquoise, and red accents on a gold ground, all set in a well of narrow gold bands flanking a heavy light blue band with dark blue crosses and surmounted by a row of vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and red ; written area throughout surrounded by gold frame with narrow gold bands defining divisions within ; red rule border defines margin ; headings, keywords and some marginalia rubricated ; occasional textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) with some element of shikastah (شكسته نستعليق) ; elegant, compact Ottoman hand in a medium line ; serifless, with marked effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, elongated horizontal strokes, final nūn often reversed or recurved.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 23 lines per page with written area divided to two columns, headings centered in written area and a variable number of lines glossing the margins ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V-1 (9), 5 V(59), V+2 (71), 14 V(211), IV+2 (221), IV (229), III-1 (234), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Incipit: "عمر من در سایه آن قامت دلجو گذشت از چنان حیرت فرا سروی چسان این جو گذشت ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of a selection from the collected poems of Mīrzā Muḥammad ʻAlī Ṣāʼib Tabrīzī (d. between 1080/1669-70 and 1088/1677-8).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 679', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.281b, copied by Nāʻil Ṣuḥufī [?]. Date transcription finished appears as a chronogram "غزلق" or 1137 [غ1000 + ز7 + ل30 + ق100 =1137, i.e. 1724 or 1725].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From spine label and inscription on fol.1a (p.1), "IL 132 a1" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in light brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings and interior of envelope flap in pink tinted laid paper ; interior of foreedge flap in light brown leather ; upper and lower covers carry central blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (elongated) and pendants with vegetal pattern (compare Déroche class. OSd 8) accented with gold and red paint, bordered by fillet with strokes and dots at apices and sprandels of scallops in gold paint ; frame of striated s-shaped stamps painted gold and bordered by two gold fillets also in gold paint ; at corners and midpoints of frame, dots and strokes in gold paint ; foreedge flap decorated with fillets and heavy vegetal pattern (vine) in gold paint ; in fair condition with significant wear and pest damage but intact and still well-attached to text block.', 'Support: European laid paper, mainly with laid lines running vertically spaced roughly 11-12 laid lines per cm., single chain lines running horizontally spaced roughly 25-26 mm. apart, and watermark of three hats (tre cappeli) or caps (see p.38, 58, 230, 232, etc.), well-burnished, thin though quite sturdy; very few if any inclusions ; countermark of "V d" under trefoil appears in p.136.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) on fol.1b consists of a scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) flanked by scalloped accents filled by a vegetal pattern in gold, blue, red, and black on fields of gold and blue ; dome and flanking pieces are outlined in a blue fillet and surmounted by vertical stalks (ṭīgh) in blue positioned at alternating spandrels ; entire piece is bordered by an elaborate frame consisting of a band of blue with minute cross or diamond shapes flanked by narrow gold bands outlined by fillets ; elaborate frames appear throughout, consisting of gold band (of at least three thicknesses) bordered by black fillets surround both the entire written area for each folio as well as the columns of text within ; text rubricated with titles, headings, etc. in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Ottoman hand ; characteristically serifless with gentle effect of words descending to baseline, point of final and free-standing nūn set at mouth of tall, wide, angled bowl, occasionally nearly assimilated with it, hāʻ mudghamah looking like two inverted commas, pointing (for two and three dots) often in conjoined dots or strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page; written area consists of a broad single column most often divided into two columns and framed thusly, though this layout varies ; in certain sections a centered column of two hemistiches of verse alternates with verse laid in two columns, divided at each hemistich ; headings usually appear centered on the single column or across its width; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i,12 V (120), IV (128), I (130), 6 V (190), IV+1 (199), 3 V (229), V+1 (240), 2 I (244), i ; chiefly quinions; leaves falling between the various sections of poetry left partially blank (though without missing text) and leaves following close of text intially left blank but now carry additional matter including lines of poetry, lines on Ebussuud Efendi, etc. ; catchwords present; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "تمام شد ديوان نابى رحمه الله تعالى في تاريخ غزلق دست حقير نائل صحفى [؟] تم"', 'Explicit: "طاغيلرسه كور رآنى نكران جمع اولور ايه اولور آب روان"', 'Incipit: [rubric]" قصيده در توحيد باري جل شانه براى باعث ترتيب ديوان ابراهيم پاشا رح [text] تعالى الله زهى ديوانطراز صورت معنا كه جسم لفظله روح مآ لي ايلمش الما ..."', 'Title from inscription below headpiece on fol.1b.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Collected poems (ghazalīyāt, qaṣāyid, rubāʻiyāt, etc.) of Nabi, followed by a few additional excerpts at close of codex.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 296', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon. Executed for (bi-rasm) one Ahmet Paşa ( احمد پاشا ), likely grand vizier (possibly Kara Ahmet Paşa, Hafız Ahmet Paşa, etc.). Decoration, etc. would suggest 16th or 17th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "185 T. D. M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on interior of upper cover ; traces of numeral inscribed on tail edge.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in quite dark brown (nearly black) leather (spine and fore edge flap now in dark red leather) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns / flyleaves now in untinted European laid paper with name watermark partially visible (over yellow laid paper) ; upper and lower covers carry stamped scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OSh 9), pendants and cornerpieces with gold-painted accents and tooled border ; sewn in pale yellow and dark blue thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, damaged ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, etc. ; has been rebacked (spine repair in dark red brown leather) and fore edge flap has been repaired as well.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical and horizontal, indistinct), cloudy formation, heavily sized and burnished, glossy and crisp, medium cream in color ; much foxing.', 'Decoration: Illuminated frontispiece (roundel) on \'title page\' (p.5) carrying patronage statement / ex libris of Ahmet Paşa ( احمد پاشا ) in white on a gold ground at center and bordered by delicate arabesque with floral motifs in gold, orange, pink, red, yellow and black on a field of lapis lazuli ; elegant illuminated headpiece at opening on p.6 consisting of rectangular piece with central cartouche (more mandorla shape) carrying title ("ديوان سلطان العارفين جلال الدين مولانا الرومى") in white on a gold ground surrounded by a rich arabesque in gold with floral accents in pink, orange, red, yellow, lavender and white on a lapis lazuli ground, surmounted by a narrower rectangle continuing the arabesque composition and itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area (and columns within) surrounded by gold frame ; keywords and headings chrysographed.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; compact, elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page with written area mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V-3 (7), 2 V(27), IV (35), 3 V(65), IV (73), 15 V(223), IV (271), IV-2 (277) ; quinions and quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaf and skips two pages between pp.485-486).', 'Incipit: "ای طایران قدس را عشقت فزوده بالها ..."', 'Title from headpiece at opening on p.6.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of the Dīvān of Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī, commonly called Dīvān-i Shams-i Tabrīz given the poet's taking the name of his spiritual guide and mystic lover Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn ʻAlī Tabrīzī as his takhalluṣ."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 864', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest late 18th or 19th century [as proposed by G. Meredith-Owens].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip of paper with notes in handwriting of G. Meredith-Owens "MO 3. Persian | Dīvān of S̲anāʼī in two different hands (perhaps from two incomplete copies of the same work). Undated. XIXth century." -- b. Slip of paper with note "counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" -- c. Recycled card with note "binding by Menzies, London, 1914" -- d. Slip of paper: "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Meredith-Owens notes."', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 13', 'Binding: Boards covered in mauve paper (blotched design evoking marbling) with red-brown leather over spine and board corners (half binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted wove paper ; head edge of text block gilt ; spine gold-stamped with "PERSIAN MSS." and accents on raised bands ; sewn in white thread over five recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands in green, red and white stripes ; overall in good condition with minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian or Persian) laid paper of two types ; opening excerpt on a type with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical or horizontal, somewhat indistinct, some curving) and no chain lines plainly visible, cloudy formation, thin and transluscent though sturdy, dark cream with a grayish tint ; latter excerpt on a type with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat indistinct) and chain lines visible (see p.198, etc.), cloudy formation, sturdy though transluscent, grayish tint ; replacement leaves in European wove paper.', 'Decoration: Diagram accompanying excerpt on p.227.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq and shikastah (shikastah-nastaʻlīq / شكسته نستعليق) ; two main hands ; opening section (pp.25-180) in a large, elegant nastaʻlīq in a heavy line, serifless with elongation of horizontal strokes, descent of words to baseline, pointing in distinct or conjoined dots ; latter section (pp.197-208) mainly in a brisk shikastah-nastaʻlīq, serifless and more compact with sweeping descenders and elongated horizontal strokes (p.197 in a different nastaʻlīq) ; glosses and excerpts at close (pp.225-227) in still different hands.', 'Layout: Written in up to 15 lines per page, divided to two columns.', 'Collation: ii, III (6), II (10), IV-2 (16), 10 IV(88), 2 II(96), IV-2 (102), 2 II(110), 2 (112), II (116), ii ; original gatherings exclusively quaternions (some anomalous) ; blank replacement leaves inserted where text lacks ; middle of the quire marks in the form of black oblique strokes, upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf, lower outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; foliation in now grey ink, Western numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Explicit: "... امر است تمام شد دیوان ثنائی"', 'Title from close on p.208.', 'Ms. composite codex.', 'Composite copy of the Dīvān of S̲anāʼī (Ḥusayn ibn Ghiyās̲ al-Dīn ʻAlī al-Mashhadī, d.1587?), acephalous and incomplete, possibly compiled from two incomplete copies with blank replacement leaves inserted where text was lacking.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 868', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; hand, paper, etc. may suggest 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with description (in hand of E. Husselman ?) "Z̤ahīr, Abū Naṣr, Fāryābī | Dīvān. | n. f. in Mich. MSS." (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Slip with note "counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" (paginated pp.3-4) -- c. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) Husselman notes" (paginated pp.5-6).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 17', 'Binding: Boards covered in red cloth with dark red-orange leather over spine and board corners (half binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in a sponge \'marbled\' (mottled, cloudy appearance) laid paper in shades of red, pink and yellow ; head edge of text block gilt ; spine carries raised bands and gold-stamped "ZAHĪR AD-DĪN FĀRYĀBĪ | MS." ; sewn in white thread over five recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands in dark green ; overall in good condition.', 'Support: non-European laid paper (much repaired) with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical, indistinct, some curving) and chain lines faintly visible, cloudy formation, sturdy, well-burnished, dark cream in color ; flyleaves and replacement leaves in European laid paper ; some pest damage.', 'Decoration: Section headings rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless with effect of tilt to the right and of words descending to baseline, elongation and somewhat exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots, quite rounded ; headings in a large, elegant naskh.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 15 lines per page, with written area divided to two columns ; decorative layout toward the latter part of the work with fewer lines and every other line on the diagonal (see p.243, etc.).', 'Collation: iii, IV+1-3+3 (9), 9 IV(81), II (85), IV+1 (94), 2 IV(110), IV-2+2 (118), 3 IV(142), i ; original fragment almost exclusively quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of black strokes, lower outer corner of right-hand leaf, upper outer corner of left-hand leaf ; numerous blank replacement leaves have been inserted where original fragment was lacking ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (upper outer corner of verso of each original leaf) ; foliation in black ink, Western numerals (in upper margin of verso of each original leaf) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts, flyleaves and added leaves and mistakenly skips ahead four pages following p.15 with p.20).', 'Incipit: "طغرل بن ارسلان ملک الشعرا ظهیر الدین فی مدح السلطان چو زهره وقت صبوح از افق بسازد جنگ زمانه راست [تیز] کند ناله مرا آهنگ ..."', "Title from inscriptions on 'title page' (p.13).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine though fragmentary copy of the Dīvān of the court poet Ẓahīr al-Dīn Abū al-Faz̤l Ṭāhir ibn Muḥammad al-Fāryābī (d.1201).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 366', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at close, copied by ("nammaqahu [?]...") one ʻAbd al-Rashīd ...[?] with transcription completed in Ramaḍān 1240 [?] [April-May 1825, or April-May 1140, 1725 ?].', 'Accompanying materials: Folded slip of paper with notes in blue ink in hand of G. Meredith-Owens "366 A Dīvān, probably that of Amīr Khusraw of Delhi (but I should need rapid copies of some folios to verify this). 19th century - the paper suggests India."', 'Former shelfmark: "426 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on interior of upper cover.', 'Binding: Red-brown (see turn-ins) coarse-grained leather lined in untinted laid paper (limp binding) ; Type III binding (without flap), two piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; upper and lower covers carry blind-tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in lime green thread, two stations ; endbands virtually gone, though core of headband remains ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, moisture damage, staining, spine curved and fore edge protruding, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid (likely Indian or Persian) paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical, quite distinct) and no chain lines clearly visible, well-burnished, sturdy, and fairly transluscent though stained a dark brown.', 'Decoration: Keywords (mainly in margins at end of each line) and section headings rubricated ; races of once "gold" (now gone to green) cloud-bands on opening leaf (facing now lost incipit page) ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of "gold" band defined by black fillets with outermost light blue fillet, columns within and margin defined by narrow "gold" bands outlined by black fillets.', "Script: Shikastah (shikastah-nastaʻlīq / شكسته نستعليق ) ; elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated 'horizontal' strokes.", 'Layout: Written in 14 lines per page, mainly divided to two columns; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: VI-1 (7), 7 IV(63), III (69), 4 IV(101), III (107) ; almost exclusively quaternions with two ternions ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "نمقه الاقل [؟] العبد عبد الرشيد ... في شهر رمضان المبارك سنه ۱۲۴۰ [?] ..."', 'Incipit: "بسوی مصر نیامد نسیمی از کنعان که دامنی نزند آتش زلیخا را ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Worn, acephalous copy of a selection of poetry, possibly from the Dīvān of Zakī Hamadānī (see Āghā Buzurg al-Ṭihrānī, no.2352). Contribution to the cataloguing from Hossein Mottaghi.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 285', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.543, copied by Aḥmad Jaʻfar [?] with transcription completed Rabīʻ I 1232 [January-February 1817] in Iṣfahān.', 'Former shelfmark: "199 T. D. M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf (p.1) ; "25 /10 " inscribed in ink on \'title page\' (p.3).', 'Binding: Heavy pasteboards covered in painted lacquerwork, spine in dark brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; two-piece binding with overlapping flanges plainly visible at spine (spine leather detaching with second layer of leather visible looking on spine from lower cover) ; doublures in fine painted lacquerwork of swirling floral vegetal composition in gold on a dark green ground surrounded by vegetal border in green and gold on a dark red ground with flanking gold fillets (composition of upper doublure mirrors that of lower doublure) ; upper and lower covers bear paintings of nearly identical floral composition in mirror image to one another on a dark red background, namely a central cluster of peonies, poppies, tulips, etc. with iris, roses, poppies, and other floral forms all in shades of pink, light blue, lavender, and white with leaves in various shades of green, and surrounded by decorative band of floral vegetal motifs on a dark green ground framed in gold-painted borders ; sewn in lime green thread, two stations, sewing failing, many gatherings loose ; worked chevron endbands in lime green and pink, fairly good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion and losses to lacquerwork and pasteboard, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (Persian) laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines only faintly visible roughly 20 mm. apart (vertical), gray in color, crisp and transluscent though sturdy, quite well-burnished ; many bifolia split ; minor pest and moisture damage.', 'Decoration: Elaborate illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ ) at opening on p.4 consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying the basmalah in blue flanked by floral vegetal designs (in gold, red-orange, blue, white, etc.) on fields of blue (approaching lapis lazuli), red and gold, surmounted by large w-shaped piece filled with swirling arabesque and floral motifs in gold, red-orange, pink, white, blue, etc. on grounds of gold, red, and blue (approaching lapis lazuli), w-shaped piece bordered in a row of lozenges with similar floral vegetal design, entire piece set into a heavy well of gold interlace bordered in red bands with white accents ; illuminated marginal decoration of incipit and facing page consisting of swirling vegetal composition with large sāz leaves and floral forms in gold with black outline ; written area throughout set off with gold cloud-bands ; vegetal composition in gold fills band dividing two columns of written area or flanking centered text ; written area (and margin) framed by gold bands outlined in black fillets.', 'Script: Shikastah (shikastah-nastaʻlīq / شكسته نستعليق ) ; elegant hand ; serifless with sweeping elongated horizontal strokes, free assimilation of letters, misplaced (or distant, or unexpectedly combined) pointing, uncurved final yāʼ, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 16 lines per page with written area mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 34 IV(272) ; exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "... شهر ربيع الاول ١٢٣٢ در دار [؟] السلطنه اصفهان ... اين كتاب مستطاب ... بخط احمد [؟] جعفر ..."', 'Explicit: "طاقش بی رواق چشم خوبان آمد این روی که ر نشین عالم آمد ..."', 'Incipit: "زهی مثالی که چون جمالت نبسته نقشی زمانه زیبا بخنده شیرین ببذله شکر بغمزه لیلی بعشوه سلمی ...."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Dīvān of Āqā Muḥammad ʻĀshiq Iṣfahānī (d.1768 or 9) opening with the ghazals.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 845', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, etc. would suggest late 16th or early 17th century.', 'Binding: Boards covered in light brown leather ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry border in blind rules ; five raised bands on spine ; sewn in cream thread, four stations, over cords ; green silk bookmark (register) attached to spine at head ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of spine leather (split), etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines (horizontal) seemingly grouped in threes with 14-15 mm. between chains and 53 mm. between groups, most leaves tinted salmon (ornage-pink), sturdy and well-burnished ; flyleaves in European laid paper with fleur de lis in shield / arms with crown above ; staining and minor pest damage.', 'Decoration: Splendid illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.8 consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying the title "ديوان عشقى" in white flanked by floral accents in gold, turquoise, white, etc. on a lapis lazuli ground, surmounted by scalloped w-shaped piece filled with swirling arabesques and floral motifs in gold, turquoise, white, etc. on grounds of black and lapis lazuli, entire piece set in a well of gold, turquoise and lapis bands and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; margins of incipit and facing page filled with floral designs in gold ; similar though somewhat smaller illuminated headpiece with heading "غزليات" in white and marginal designs at opening of ghazalīyāt on p.104 ; written area throughout surrounded by a frame consisting of a gold band defined by black fillets with outermost blue rule, divisions within defined by narrow gold bands outlined in black fillets ; keywords and headings chrysographed.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant hand in a medium line ; serifless, with dramatic effect of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 12 lines per page with written area divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iv (i is pastedown), 2 III(12), 4 IV(44), 2 III(56), IV (64), 2 II(72), 7 IV(128), III (134), III-2 (138), iv (iv is pastedown) ; chiefly quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of oblique strokes in black ink in opposite outer corners ; p.103 between qaṣāʼid (close on p.102) and ghazalīyāt (opening p.104) left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Incipit: "ای دل هرزه گرد هرجایی زین تکاپو چه شد که باز ایی ..."', 'Title from illuminated headpiece at opening (p.8).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Exquisite copy of a Persian Dīvān with qaṣāʼid and ghazalīyāt of uncertain authorship, possibly of Aşkî (fl.1571) translator of ʻAyn al-Quḍāh al-Hamadānī\'s "Kanz al-ḥaqʼāq" (per the translator\'s preface) and Farīd al-Dīn ʻAttār\'s Mukhtārnāmah (see p.205 in Türk dili ve edebiyatı ansiklopedisi (1977), v.1 ; p.18 in Osmanlı müellifleri (1972), v.2 and p.248 in Fihris al-makhṭūṭāt al-Turkīyah al-ʻUthmānīyah allatī iqtanatʹhā Dār al-Kutub al-Qawmīyah mundhu ʻām 1870 ḥattá nihāyat 1980, v.1).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 338', "Origin: As appears in inscription on 'title page' (p.1) and in colophons on p.201 and 331, copied by one ʻAbd al-Ghanī Bakrī [?]. As appears in colophon on p.201, transcription of qaṣāyid completed in Dhū Qaʻdah 1028 [October-November 1619]. As appears in colophon on p.331, transcription of later section completed Ṣafar 1029 [February 1620]. Transcription of other sections likely completed around the same time.", 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather with tan leather over spine and edges / turn-ins (possibly inverted recylcled cover with doublures now out) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in pink-tinted paper ; upper and lower covers carry central mandorla and pendants in gold-painted leather filigree appliqué over blue and green paper ; now sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and spring green, fairly good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, staining, minor pest damage, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly distinct) and occasional pairs of chain lines faintly visible, somewhat cloudy formation, thin though sturdy, beige in color, well-sized and burnished ; some leaves tinted dull yellow or pale peach ; many leaves split and repaired (e.g. written area with headpiece and catchword of incipit page have been trimmed and mounted onto another leaf, etc.).', 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of dībāchah on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying the title for the opening section (preface) in white ("ديباچه ديوان عرفي") flanked by elegant floral vegetal motifs in red, white, yellow, pink, lavender, and turquoise on fields of lapis lazuli and black, surmounted by a large (vertically elongated) w-shaped piece filled with superbly executed swirling floral vegetal decoration in gold, red, pink, lavender, yellow, turquoise, white, and light blue on fields of lapis lazuli and gold, entire piece set into an elaborate well of red, blue, gold, white, and turquoise bands ; another exquisite illuminated headpiece at the opening of the dīvān proper (begins with the qaṣīdahs) on p.22 similar in composition to the first but with vertically elongated scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) surmounting rectangular piece, more generous use of white and turquoise, well of heavy gold interlace with turquoise and lavender accents, and vertical stalks (tīgh) in tact ; written area of dībāchah incipit and facing page surrounded by a frame consisting of a series of red, gold, black and blue fillets, with text set off by gold cloud-bands ; written area elsewhere gold-flecked and surrounded by frame in gold with outermost blue rule ; additional illuminated headpieces appear at openings of sections on p.202, 230, 334, 368.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; compact, elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV (8), I (10), 4 IV(42), III (48), 2 IV(64), III (70), 4 IV(102), 2 III(114), IV (122), III (128), IV (136), III (142), IV (122), III (128), IV (136), III (142), 3 IV(166), III (172), IV (180), I+1 (183), 4 IV(215), III (221), IV (229), II (233), III (239), 6 IV(287), III (293), 3 IV(317), V+1 (328) ; leaves between dībāchah and opening of dīvān left blank (pp.20-21) as well as between later sections (see pp.228-229, 332-333, 366-367) ; pp.295, 209, 351 left partially blank (perhaps for illustration never realized) ;catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "تمت القصايد العرفيه تحريرا بتاريخ شهر ذى قعده سنه ١٠٢٨ كتبه الداعى عبد الغنى بكرى [؟] اللهم اغفر [له] ولوالديه" ; "تمت فى تاريخ شهر صفر سنه ١٠٢٩ كتبه الداعى عبد الغنى"', 'Incipit: [dībāchah] " حمدی که از نهایت شایستگی منزه از شایبه معین و تخصیص آمده اجمال آن ..." ; [dīvān, opening in the qaṣīdahs] "ای متاع درد در بازار جان انداخته ای متاع ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Exquisite (though damaged) copy of the Dīvān of ʻUrfī Shīrāzī (d.1590 or 91).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 634', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.368b (p.736), copied by Muḥammad ibn al-Shaykh Muḥammad [...?]. Transcription finished ("wa-kāna al-farāgh min naskhih...") Saturday 20 [?] Jumādá II 1176 [ca. 6 January 1763] in Bilād al-bayt [?].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From spine label and inscription on interior of upper cover, "IL 126" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in darkened red-brown leather (color of envelope flap a much more vibrant red), repairs to spine and interior of fore edge flap in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and interior of envelope flap in laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-tooled central circular piece (composition quite similar to Déroche class. NSv 1 or 2) with pendants and simple frame ; in somewhat poor condition with fore-edge flap detaching from lower cover and envelope flap, repairs to joints between the covers and the spine, much abrasion, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with laid lines running horiztonally spaced roughly 13 laid lines in 20 mm. and chain lines running vertically spaced roughly 23-25 mm. apart ; lightly burnished.', 'Decoration: Textual dividers in the form of red discs ; text rubricated with section titles, occasional paragraphs in prose at the beginnings of new sections, and textual dividers in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Syrian or Turkish hand (?) ; virtually sans serif with occasional right-sloping head-serifs on free-standing alif and left-sloping head-serifs on alif of lām alif ligature ; kāf mashkūlah preferred ; elongated, horizontal character with contrast between thicker horizontal strokes and thinner vertical strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; poetry often arranged in two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V-4(6), 16 V (166), II (170), III (176), 19 V (366), I (368), i ; chiefly quinions ; at least one bifolium and very likely two bifolia are missing from the center of the first quire in the introductory matter of the text (missing text corresponds to p.7-13 of the 1854 Būlāq edition) ; catchwords present but occasionally lost to trimming ; traces of perhaps an earlier foliation in Hindu-Arabic numerals (see p.391, 583, etc.) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "وكان الفراغ من نسخه ببلاد [؟] البيت بعد صلاة المغرب عشرين [؟] في جماذ [كذا] الثاني على يد محمد بن الشيخ محمد [..؟] من شهور سنة 1176"', 'Explicit: "وما تلى عبد الغني المديح به يخص ذلك الفريح"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي فتح خزائن الامكان بمفاتيح الكرم والامتنان واظهر سره المكنون بين الكاف والنون انما امره لشيئ اذا اراده ان يقول كن فيكون"', "Title from inscription of 'title page' fol.1a (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'The first bāb of the collected poems of the author, Dīwān al-dawāwīn wa-rayḥān al-rayāḥīn fī tajallīyat al-ḥaqq al-mubīn, with a poem praising Ibn al-ʻArabī at the close. Description provided by Maxim Romanov.'])

en: (count: ['Table of contents on pp. [1-2]; illuminated ʻunwān and chapter heading on pp. [5-6]; illuminated tailpiece; subsequent chapter headings treated more simply; gold rosettes mark sentence breaks on pp. [5-6]; text rubricated, Koranic citations overlined in red; text enclosed within gold borders; marginal supercommentaries written in hand of copyist; edges painted with gilt in foliate patterns.', '"Baiḍāwī\'s commentary on the Koran, with supercommentaries by Shihāb, Sheikh Zādah, Saʻdī Efendī, ʻAṣām, Ghanī Zādah, Sinān Efendī, and others." Cataloging by William Hoyt Worrell, 1925. This is the author\'smostfamous and popular work.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 642', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.139b, copied by Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad min al-Baladay An...[?]. Transcription finished ("wa-kāna al-farāgh min naskhih...") Wednesday, 10 Jumādá I 887 [ca. 27 June 1482]. As appears in ex libris on fol.1a, copied for ("bi-rasm") ʻAlā’ī al-Dīn ibn ...[?] Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Shahīd al-Dīn Aḥmad ibn al-Sa‘īdī.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner margin of fol.1a "IL 132a" and spine label, "IL 132" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather (goatskin) with red leather (goatskin) repairs; Type II (with flap) though flap is now missing; may be original, given the contemporaneous dating of the similar cover on Chester Beaty Library Moritz Collection 60 (see Bosch, Carswell, & Petherbridge no.77, p.201); upper and lower cover bear a design blind-tooled with gold paint, consisting of of frame, central scalloped mandorla, and accents; frame has a central motif made with interlocking S-shaped stamps, two fillets on either side, and an innermost fifth fillet painted gold; corners of the frame are marked with diagonal lines of small crosses, similar to the ones on the titlepiece; at center is 10-lobed mandorla, the scallops of which have a double gold painted outline, as well as small circles at the apex of each scallop and small crosses where the ends of each scallop meet; ogival points have simple, three-pointed calyxes atop slightly arched crossbars; interior of the mandorla bears another calyx with additional ogival calyxes, which are also painted gold on the upper cover; within the mandorla an elaborate filled pattern is present, but difficult to see; doublures are of a slightly lighter brown leather, have four-fillet frames and bear small, hand-tooled, sixteen-lobed shamsas with clearly visible centering lines that extend to the edges of the innermost fillet of the frames; in poor condition.', 'Support: non-European laid paper, at least three types are used; one paper is rather thick with chainlines running horizontally in alternating groups of 2 and 3, individual chainlines spaced 11 mm. apart and groups spaced roughly 40 mm. apart; another paper seems quite similar except for having been tinted a brownish-ochre; third paper is of a similar color to the second, but smaller, thinner, more highly burnished, and rather ragged at the edges; the tinted papers appear to have been laid into the quires to embellish the copy.', "Decoration: Titlepiece on fol.1a consists of a rectangular panel bearing the title in red tawqīʻ above a central panel bearing a circular medallion (shamsah) with 'pendants' (Weisweiler class. 57-60) bordered in gold-painted black double-lines filled with a central pattern of small crosses and carrying an ex libris in red tawqīʻ; piece is framed with an outermost red fillet, a gold-filled double black line, a central series of equilateral crosses that seem to recall blind-tooling techniques, another gold-filled double black line, and final, innermost red fillet; text is polychrome with the main text in black and a variety of other colors used in various combinations for the headings and the dots separating the hemistitches, often with some sort of scheme of alternating colors; in the opening quires, both the chapter headings and the dots are in red, but in subsequent quires the dots may be red while the titles are in lime green;a slate-blue color also often appears; often the dots will be outlined in either black or yellowish-white ink; obviously executed with careful attention.", 'Script: Naskh; small to medium Turkish hand with thin, elongated ascenders and elongated, swooping descenders; generally sans serif; quite legible; fully vocalized; text of titlepiece in tawqīʻ script.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page; single column but with the hemistitches divided by colored dots to appear as two columns; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV (8), V (18), IV (26), 3 V (56), IV (64), III (70), V + 1 (81), IV (89), II (93), 2 III (105), 3 V (135), II (139); catchwords lacking; pagination in pencil, Western numerals supplied in cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم الديوان المبارك بحمد لله وعونه وحسن توفيقه وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم وكان الفراغ من نسخه يوم الاربعا عاشر جمادى الاول من شهور سنة سبعة وثمانين وثمانة ماية وكتبه العبد الفقير الى الله تعالى محمد بن محمد من [؟] البلدي انكورية [...؟]"', 'Explicit: " فنحن نحكم ولا يحكم علينا شيء"', 'Incipit: "حروف الهمزة قال رضي الله عنا به حققت عهد مجيتي [كذا] وولاي بشهود توحيدي وحكم وفاي"', 'Title from titlepiece on fol.1a.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Collected poetry of the Ṣūfī shaykh and poet ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad Wafāʼ (d.1405), arranged alphabetically according to the final letter of each bayt. Description provided by Noah Gardiner.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 246', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.210b (p.420), copied by Sulaymān ibn Yūnus ibn Khaṭṭāb ibn Shaḥḥādhah [?] ibn Muḥammad ibn Ḥurayz al-Satafī [?] al-Mālikī. Transcription finished "wa-kāna al-farāgh min istinsākh hādhā al-dīwān..." 14 Dhū al-Qaʻdah 1016 [ca. 31 March 1608].', 'Accompanying materials: a. between pp. 322-23 folded slip with numerals, etc. -- b. between pp.404-405 slip in laid paper with verses copied in ruqʻah.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in deep brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves as well as interior of envelope flap in shell marbled paper (pink, brown and white) ; interior of fore edge flap in same brown leather ; upper and lower covers bear gold-stamped central piece and decorative border (formed from two repeating vegetal pattern stamps and interlocking architectural pattern stamp) along with pendants and corner pieces (formed from a repeated scrolling floral pattern stamp) ; envelope flap bears complementary design formed from same stamps ; sewn in cream thread, four stations ; worked chevron endbands in cream and blue ; in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, fading, some pest damage, loss to endbands, and spine slant (cocked) ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European laid paper ; laid lines oriented horizontally or vertically (some variation from quire to quire) spaced roughly 7-9 laid lines per cm. (also varying) with some sagging or curving ; chain lines very feint and indistinct but occasionally visible - may be grouped ; quite firm, somewhat crisp, and of medium translucency ; well burnished ; only a few inclusions and undissolved fibers visible ; flyleaves in European laid paper, laid lines vertical spaced roughly 11 laid lines per cm. ; chain lines horizontal spaced 30 mm. apart ; large shield/scrollwork (six pointed star within) watermark partially visible in back flyleaf.', 'Decoration: Illuminated titlepiece on fol.1a (p.1) consisting of upper and lower rectangular panels with central roundel (shamsah) ; upper panel bears title in gold thuluth ; shamsah bears author\'s name,etc. in blue and gold, highly ligatured tawqi verging on thuluth ; lower panel continues blessings upon the author in gold thuluth ; outlined by vegetal accents in blue ; framed in pink band with blue crosses and a series of gold bands outlined with black fillets ; superbly executed illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) on fol.1b (p.2) consisting of rectangular panel surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) surmounted by vertical stalks (tigh) in blue and gold ; rectangular panel contains stylized cartouche in gold carrying title "ديوان شعر ابي الطيب" in white, surrounded by floral vegetal decoration in gold, orange-red, white, light blue, etc. on a field of lapis lazuli flanked by semi-circular pieces in light-blue and gold ; semi-circular piece carries floral vegetal design in gold, orange-red, pink, white, etc. on fields of lapis lazuli and gold ; bordered in a well with blue crosses on a pink band ; between the two pieces a rectangular band floral vegetal decoration in gold, blue, orange-red, and white on a field of black ; written area and margin (including decoratively arranged lines) framed in a series of gold bands flanked by black fillets ; incipit and facing page various floral designs in orange-red, blue, white, green, and gold ; partially chrysographed with section (divisions by letter) headings in gold ; text of titlepiece in gold and blue ; text rubricated with verse headings, numerals corresponding to glosses, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; large, clear hand of Persianate character (Iraqi ?) ; mainly sans serif but with occasional right-sloping head serif on free-standing alif, lām of definite article, etc. and left-sloping head serif on joined alif, etc. (irregular), kāf mashqūqah preferred, but mabsūṭah also appears, slight effect of inclination to the left, elongation of horizontal strokes, some sweeping descenders, quite rounded and curvilinear, pointing in distinct dots, point of final / free-standing nūn set down in bowl ; fully vocalized ; glosses of very similar character only thinner line and smaller size (likely supplied by same copyist).', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; single column, often divided to two to set off poetry, and fine ruled margin with lines arranged obliquely in decorative geometric patterns (triangles, zig-zag, etc.) ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, V-1(9), 19 V(199), VI(211), ii ; chiefly quinions ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular then rectangular, reads: "وكان الفراغ من استنساخ هذا الديوان المبارك رابع عشر شهر ذي القعدة من شهور سنة ستة عشر والف من الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلات والسلام تم وعلى يد العبد الفقير الى الله تعالى سليمان بن المرحوم يونس بن خطاب بن شحاذة بن محمد بن حذير الستفي المالكي غفر الله له ولوالديه ومشايخه واخوانه ولمن طالع فيه ودعا لم [كذا] بالمغفرة ولكل المسلمين اجمعين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين وسلم"', 'Explicit: "ومثلك يؤتى من بلاد بعيدة ليضحك ربات الحداد البواكيا. وقال ايضا يمدح سيف الدولة ... وكانه جيش ابن حرب رعته حتى كانك يا علي علي. تم شعر ابي الطيب برياذاته والحمد لله كما هو اهله. يقول كاتب اصله المنقول منه هذه النسخة نقلت هذا الديوان من نسختين ..."', 'Incipit: "قافية الهمزة قال ابو الطيب احمد بن الحسين المتنبى رحمه الله ومولده بالكوفة في كندة سنة ثلث وثلثماية يمدح سيف الدولة وكان امره باجازة ابيات على هذا الوزن وهذا الروي شعر عذل العواذل حول قلبي التائه وهوى الاحبة منه في سودائه ..."', 'Title from titlepiece on fol.1b (p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the renowned dīwān and glosses, closing with a discussion of the source material for the recension contained in the model from which this manuscript was transcribed.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 646', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper and hand suggest 19th century, perhaps late 19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmarks: From verso of front flyleaf and spine label, "IL 122" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Wooden boards covered in dark mahogany leather ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in dark green and cream mottled paper (sponge painted or faux marbled look) ; raised spine ridges ; sewn in cream thread, six stations ; stuck-on endbands ; textile bookmark (register) attached to spine at head ; overall in fairly good condition with some abrasion at board edges, etc.', 'Support: European wove paper ; some moisture damage and blocking.', 'Decoration: Written area surrounded by triple rule-border in red and blue (two innermost red rules and outermost blue rule) ; columns within the written area defined by red rules.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; serifless, only very slight tilt to the left, effect of occasional words descending to baseline, letterforms mainly characteristic of ruqʻah, pointing in strokes (horizontal stroke for two dots, stroke resembling inverted comma for three dots) rather than distinct dots, somewhat freely ligatured ; rare passages in naskh (see pp.414-415).', 'Layout: Written mainly in 19 lines per page ; written area divided to two columns to set off poetry ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 45 V(450), i ; chiefly quinions ; final five leaves unruled and left blank ; quire numbering in the form of Hind-Arabic numerals accompanied by ك at the center head of the written area of the opening recto of each quire from the eighth (see p.145, 165, etc.) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and eventually off by 100 pages, dropping from p.511 to p.412).', 'Explicit: "لا سيما مع شيء يطنطن وشيء في القرصال [؟] يبقبق"', 'Incipit: "وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم قال الشيخ الامام العلامة وحيد دهره وفريد عصره بدر الدين محمد بن برهان الدين ابراهيم الشهير بالبدر البشتكي اسبغ الله ظلاله اما بعد الحمد لله المتفرد بالجمال [المفرد بالجلال] والصلاة والسلام على محمد جامع محاسن الكمال ... وبعد فيقول [الفقير] الى كرم مولاه الغني به عما سواه محمد بن ابراهيم بن محمد البدر البشتكي غفر الله ذنوبه وستر عيوبه هذا ديوان شعر شيخنا العلامة جمال الدين محمد بن محمد بن محمد بن حسن ابن ابي الحسن بن صالح بن يحيى بن طاهر بن محمد ابن الخطيب عبد الرحمن بن نباته المصري ... قافية الهمزة قال يمدح سيدنا محمدا صلى الله عليه وسلم وشرف ومجد وكرم شجون نحوها العشاق فاؤا ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from preface on p.5.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the collected poems of Jamāl al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad Ibn Nubātah al-Miṣrī (d.1366), compiled by Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Bashtakī (d.1426 or 7) from the main collection made by the poet himself and other smaller collections.'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Grapes with crown and cartouche, initials PSL in roman.', 'Text rubricated; corrections and extensive marginal notes in hand of copyist; titles on pp. [1] and [17] in another hand.', 'Date in colophon: 1064.', 'Pp. [1-12]. Bound with: Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Rūdānī, Bahjat al-ṭullāb fī al-ʻamal bi-al-asṭurlāb, pp. [17-50].', "Poem on the sine quadrant in a muqaddimah and 20 bābs based on the author's own work al-Risālah al-Shihābīyah fī al-aʻmāl al-jaybīyah, a versification of Badr al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad Sibṭ al-Māridīnī's Risālah fī al-ʻamal bi-al-rubʻ al-mujayyab."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 962', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and eventually bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Accompanying materials: Several slips with brief notes (roughly one line on each slip) in Arabic and English on the contents and collation.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 111', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "دعاية مبشرات للبهاء| J.H.D." ; sewn in white thread over two recessed cords, tightly bound ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Machine wove paper of at least two different types.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a medium to heavy line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 17-21 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 6 VI(72), V (82), 2 (84), IV (92), i ; chiefly senions ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Incipit: "سبحانك اللهم يا الهي قد نزلت من سماء عز احديتك مياه الوجود بوجودك ورحمانيتك ..."', 'Title from inscription at head of incipit page (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of a selection of Bahai tracts taken from the letters of ʻAbd al-Bahāʼ ʻAbbās Afandī (d.1921), etc.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 83', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.526, copied by ʻAbd al-Raḥīm ibn Iskandar. Transcription completed ("qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min katb hādhā al-kitāb...") at noon on Friday 18 Rabīʻ II 966 [ca. 28 January 1559].', 'Accompanying materials: Numerous inserts carrying notes, glosses (paginated pp.13-14, pp.95-96, pp.177-178, pp.185-186, pp.189-190, pp.197-198, pp.229-230, pp.237-238, pp.261-262, pp.323-324, pp.395-396) and in two cases, detailed diagrams (paginated pp.65-66 and pp.111-112).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 84. Work on Hanafi law by Muh. b. Faramurz."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in yellow laid paper (over marbled paper) ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla with vegetal composition (horizontal and vertical symmetry as with Déroche class. OSd) ; sewn mainly in white thread (rarely yellow), two and four stations, though many threads are loose, broken or missing threads and textblock is entirely detached at spine ; endbands lost though traces of primaries in yellow and green visible ; in very poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, fore-edge flap detaching from lower cover, etc. ; various repairs in brown leathers ; cover extremely ill-fitting (far too small) ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with chain lines grouped in threes, 11-16 mm. between the chains and 32-39 mm. between the groups ; flyleaves in European laid paper with three crescents (tre lune) watermark ; added leaves carrying table of contents in European laid paper with crown above grapes or beaded diamond watermark ; latter quires of text in European laid paper with 10-11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and some notabilia (side-heads) rubricated ; some overlining and textual dividers in the form of discs in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Turkish or Persian hand ; virtually sans serif, though quite miniscule right-sloping head serif occasionally appears on lām, etc. ; mainly closed counters ; kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred ; kāf alif ligature forming complete loop ; occasional very slight effect of words descending to baseline.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, II (4), 24 V(244), IV (252), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and inserts, skips two pages between pp.453-454).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "قد وقع الفراغ من كتب هذا الكتاب في يوم الجمعة وقت الظهر الثامن عشر في شهر ربيع الاخر من سنة ست وستين وتسعمائة على يد عبد اضعف عباد الله عبد الرحيم بن الحاج اسكندر عفى عنهما الملك المعبود القادر الحمد لله على الاتمام وعلى كل حال في الاسلام والصلوة والسلام على رسوله سيد الانام وعلى اله العظام واصحابه الاكرام" ; followed by authorial colophon.', 'Explicit: "كان فسخهما بمنزلة الاقالة فيلزم الوصي كما لو تقابلا حقيقة فاذا فسخ القاضي لم يكن اقالة فلا يلزم الوصي. هذا اخر ما من الله تع علي بلطفه من شرح غرر الاحكام المسمى بدرر الحكام واستطلاع اراء فضلاء الامة العظام ... ليس الغرض الاصلي من هذه الكلمات التمدح بل الامثال بما يفهم من قوله تع واما بنعمة ربك فحدث"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي احكم احكام الشرع القويم بمحكمه كتابه واعلى اعلام الدين المستقيم بمعظم خطابه ..."', 'Title from close on p.525.', 'Ms. codex.', '5. fol.252b : [blank].', '4. fol.251b-fol.252a : Risale-yi istihlaf / Kemalpaşazade.', '3. fol.251a : [originally blank, now carries various excerpts].', '2. fol.5a-fol.250b : Durar al-ḥukkām / Molla Hüsrev.', '1. fol.1a-fol.4b : [added table of contents].', "Fine copy of Muḥammad ibn Farāmurz Mullā Khusraw's commentary upon his own treatise on principles of Ḥanafī legal practice, Ghurar al-aḥkām, followed by a brief treatise by Kemalpaşazade on a question concerning qāḍīs."])

en: (count: ["On pp. [1-2], text decorated with gold ʻunwān and borders; Koranic text and chapter headings in purple (chapter headings sometimes separated from text with red rules), commentary in black; marginal corrections in hand of copyist; marginal notations in purple indicate chapter headings and division of Koranic text into 30 sections; author's name found in notations in upper left corners of pages marking beginning of each kurrāsah, many of these notations have been cut away.", "Dates in copyist's notation on p. [165]: wa-kamala al-awwal wa-huwa al-aṣl al-musawwad mimmā ḥarrarahu al-mawlá al-hammām Maḥmūd wa-sammā Durr al-asrār sādis al-Muḥarram ʻām 1272 [i.e. 18 September 1855] wa-ḥaṣal rasm suṭūrihi wa-waṣala kamāl surūrihi wasaṭ hilāl al-rasūl al-akram ʻām 1284 [i.e. 1867 or 8] ... ḥarrarahu mawlá al-salām sāmaḥahu mawlāhu al-malik al-ʻādil al-ʻallām. Date in colophon: sanat 1274 [1857 or 8].", 'Text (not this copy) published.', 'Commentary on the Koran.'])

en: (count: ['Illuminated ʻunwān on p. [7]; text rubricated and overlined in red; marginal corrections, notes, and finding aids in hand of copyist; table of contents in hand of copyist; vol. has edge title: kitāb al-ṭahārah.', "Date of composition, copyist's name and date of copying in colophon: qāla muʼallifuhu ... Muḥammad ʻAlāʼ al-Dīn ibn al-shaykh ʻAlī ... qad faraghtu min taʼlīfihi fī awākhir shahr Muḥarram al-ḥarām min shuhūr sanat iḥdá wa-sabʻīn wa-alf [i.e. October 1660] ... rasamahu al-faqīr Ḥāfiẓ Muḥammad Amīn ibn Muḥammad sanat 1221 [i.e. 1806 or 7].", "A collection of Islamic law according to the Ḥanafī tradition, extracted from the author's ten-volume Khazāʼin al-asrār wa-badīʻ al-afkār (a commentary on a work by Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd Allāh Abū al-Timirtāshī called Tanwīr al-abṣār wa-jāmiʻ al-biḥār)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 891', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.258, transcription completed 16 Dhū al-Qaʻdah 1240 [ca. 2 July 1825].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Scrap with inscription in ink "Durr i Maknūn | A.H. 1264 [?] | Not in B.M. or India Office" (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Slip of ruled paper with inscription in ink "Durr | e | maknūn | – | MS. | 1204 | DURR | E | MAKNŪN | – | MS. | 1204 | Title on label. | Mended & furbished | Label removed & thrown away." (paginated pp.3-4) -- c. Slip with description in hand of G. Meredith-Owens "MO 16 Durr-i maknūn | A ṣūfī poem, being an abridgement of of the Mas̲navī of Rūmī made by ʻAbd al-Fattāḥ Gujaratī. Copied in 1204 (?)" (paginated pp.5-6) -- d. Slip with description (in hand of E. Husselman ?) "Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad, Jalāl al-Dīn, Rūmī | Durr i maknūn. An abridgment of the Masnavi Abd al-Fattah, Gujurātī. Written A.H. 1240 [in red pencil, \'? 1204 ?\'] = A.D. 1824. | n. f. anywhere | 118 ff. 236 pp." (paginated pp.7-8) -- e. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Husselman and Meredith-Owen notes" (paginated pp.9-10) -- f. Slip with note "counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" (paginated pp.11-12).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 40', 'Binding: Pasteboards (thin) covered in dark red leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures and hinges (trimmed in zig-zag pattern) also in dark red leather ; spine gold-stamped "PERSIAN | M. S." ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in dark blue and cream (headband) and dark blue and red (tailband), in fairly good condition ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion, shrinkage, etc. ; pieced repairs in red leather at head and tail of spine, damaged at tail exposing primaries.', "Support: non-European (likely Indian or Persian) laid paper with roughly 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical, faint and fairly indistinct) and no chain lines plainly visible, quite cloudy formation, dark cream in color, quite well-burnished (burnisher's marks visible) ; flyleaves in European laid paper with watermark of dagger [?] in circle visible in front flyleaves.", 'Decoration: Simple headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.24, consisting of rectangular piece carrying the basmalah surmounted by scalloped dome (flanked by two other scalloped domes to evoke w-shaped piece) outlined in red and blue rules ; keywords and headings rubricated ; written area surrounded by triple rule-border in red and blue, divisions within defined by double rule-borders in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant, compact hand in a medium line ; serifless with marked descent of words to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Written in 12 lines per page, with written area mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: vi, 11 V(110), V-1 (119), iv (plus letter tipped in) ; exclusively quinions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of black oblique strokes in upper outer corner of right-hand leaf and lower-outer corner of left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; lacuna on p.154 marked "صحيح البياض" ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمت وبالخير قد عمت ١۶ ديقعده ۱۲۴ هجرى والحمد لله على ذلك والصلوه على حبيبه واله واصحابه تم"', 'Incipit: "ابتدا کرد مولوی علیه الرحمه مثنوی را در بیان معنیت [؟] حق با خلق که خمرت طینت آدم بیدی اربعین صباحا ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.23).", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of a selection of excerpts from Rūmī's (d.1273) celebrated Mas̲navī compiled and elucidated by ʻAbd al-Fattāḥ al-Gujarātī."])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: horn in scrollwork; ALMASSO in roman. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), nos. 2772 and 3748.', 'Contains astronomical tables.', 'Text rubricated and ruled in red.', 'Date of composition, name of copyist, and date of copying in colophon: qāla al-muʾallif ... kātibuhu Riḍwān fī yawm al-khāmis wa-ʻishrīn min shahr Ramaḍān sanat 1105 [20 May 1694] ... wa-qad nasakhahā min nuskhah nusikhat min nuskhat al-muʾallif ... fī shahr Ṣafar sanat 1239 [October-November 1823] tisʻah wa-thalāthīn wa-miyatayn wa-alf hijrīyah ʻalá yad al-faqīr Aḥmad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Sharbatlī.', '"An extensive treatise on timekeeping consisting of an introduction and tables lifted from the main Cairo corpus." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 107. Contains astronomical tables, star catalogs, and tables giving correspondences of the Islamic and Coptic calendars from 1819 to 1987.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 987', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 136', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "اقوال الاقدمين في الكونيات حكم سقراط | J.H.D." ; sewn in white thread over two recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition though with curvature in boards (negative draw in upper board, positive draw in lower board).', 'Support: Wove paper of two types ; opening type (first gathering, through p.32), machine wove, lined / ruled in blue ; thereafter in a sturdy machine wove type, dark cream to beige in color.', 'Decoration: Text executed entirely in red ink.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a medium to bold line ; serifless and freely ligatured with effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page.', "Collation: i, 2 VIII (32), V (42), IV (50), i ; catchwords present ; pages left fully or partially blank between sections (each comprising a single gathering), some (corresponding to the opening recto of the gathering ) to serve as 'title pages' (see pp.33, 65, 85) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "فانه يفتضح بها على رؤوس الاشهاد يوم الدين"', 'Incipit: "حكم سقباط الباري لم تزل هوية فقط وهو جوهر فقط وهو غير مدرك من جهة كنهه ووصفه الاخص لان الحقائق كلها من جهة جوهره ..."', "Title from inscription on opening 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of a collection of excerpts from ancient philosophy, including that of Socrates (سقراط), Plato (افلاطون), Pythagoras (فيثاغورث), Empedocles (ابندقلس), Plutarch (فلوطرخيس), Porphyry (فرفوريوس), etc., addressing cosmology.'])

en: (count: ['On p. [1], illuminated ʻunwān; text rubricated with overlining in gold; enclosed in gold borders; pages dyed pink (?); marginal commentary in hand of copyist.', "Date and copyist's name in colophon: waqaʻa al-farāgh min kitābatihi ... ʻalá yad al-faqīr ... ʻAbd al-Karīm ... fī yawm al-sādis wa-al-ʻishrīn min shahr Jumādá al-awwal ... min shuhūr sanat thamān wa-thamānīn wa-tisʻumiʾah [i.e. 9 July 1580].", 'On the laws of inheritance and descent (ʻilm al-farāʾiḍ).'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Anchor in circle. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), nos. 1-8.', 'Text rubricated; marginal notes in hand of copyist (?) and others.', 'Date in colophon: taḥrīran fī awākhir shahr Dhī al-Qaʻdah ʻām sabʻah wa-ʻishrīn wa-alf min hijrat al-nabawī [i.e. November 1618].', 'Pp. [5-19]. Bound with: [2] Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn al-Bannāʾ, Abwāb yastadillu bi-hā ʻalá al-awqāt wa-al-sāʻāt wa-yuʻlam bi-hā awqāt al-ṣalāh, pp. [20-47]; [3] Abū al-Ḥasan ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad al-Qalaṣādī, Kashf al-asrār ʻan ʻilm ḥurūf al-ghubār, pp. [48-116].', 'On timekeeping and the conversion of calendars.'])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated; ʻunwān on p. [2].', "Date, copyist's name, and provenance in colophon: qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min taḥrīr hādhā al-kitāb ... ʻalá yad ... ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad al-sākin fī madrasat Ramaḍān Bāshā al-wāqiʻ fī baladat Kūzalaḥṣār[?] fī yawm al-ithnayn fī waqt al-ḍaḥwah al-kubrá ... sanat ʻashar wa-miʾah wa-alf 1110.", "The author's commentary on his ʻUmdat ahl al-tawfīq wa-al-tasdīd, which was his own commentary on his work ʻAqīdat ahl al-tawḥīd al-kubrá, a work on theology."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 479', "Origin: Lengthy audition statement following the text on fol.6a (p.11) indicates that al-Ḥāfiẓ Abū Ṭāhir al-Silafī heard the text as read by its owner ʻAbd al-Ghanī ibn ʻAbd al-Wāḥid al-Maqdisī [al-Jammāʻīlī] in the presence of other auditors in Alexandria during the first 10th of Dhū al-Qaʻdah 569 [June 1174], thus establishing a firm terminus ante quem for the manuscript's transcription. It was likely copied by ʻAbd al-Ghanī al-Maqdisī not long before the audition, possibly also in Alexandria.", 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. -- c. Slip with note on one of the dated audition statements (mistaken date conversion).', 'Former shelfmark: From inscription on inner front cover and lower cover label, "IL 269a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in maroon cloth ; Western binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in blue wove paper ; title gold-stamped on cover ; sewn in heavy white thread, four stations ; covers in excellent condition ; textblock heavily repaired but stable.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper, quite thick, with 20 horizontal laid lines in 38 mm. ; chain lines very difficult to make out, though at least one pair spaced 10 mm. apart are visible in fol.4 (pp.7-8) ; quite soiled and stained ; several losses and repairs ; some ink burn.', 'Script: Naskh ; a casually pointed, unvowelled Syrian hand, freely ligatured ; free-standing alifs somewhat wavy, often ending with a left-foot but generally lacking head-serifs ; swooping descenders ; mainly closed counters ; shaddah occasionally marked ; highly ligatured contraction for اخبرنا appears as ابنا with final alif curving back to reach initial alif.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 3 I(6), i ; perhaps originally a ternion, now repaired to three single bifolia (singulions) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "قالا ثنا ابو عميرعيسى بن محمد النحاس ثنا ضمرة بن ربيعة عن الاوزاعي عن يحيى بن سعيد عن سعيد بن المسيب عن ابي ثعلبة الخشني عن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم انه قال كل ما رد عليك قوسك. اخر الكتاب والحمد لله رب العالمين وصلى الله على رسوله سيدنا المصطفى محمد النبي واله وسلم تسليما وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل"', 'Incipit: "ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله [العلي العظيم؟] اخبرنا الشيخ الامام الحافظ ابو طاهر احمد بن محمد بن احمد بن محمد بن ابراهيم السلفي [...] ابنا الفقيه ابو عبد الله محمد بن مسعود بن احمد بن شذرة الخطيب [المدني؟] بشهور ستان على مقربة من اصبهان بقرأتي عليه من اصل سماعه في [...] من سنة احدى وتسعين واربع ماية ابنا ابو علي الحسين بن محمد الحسين بن ابي [...] الهروي قرأه عليه بهراة ابنا ابو يعقوب اسحاق بن ابي اسحاق العدل الحافظ ابنا [عبد الله] بن احمد بن حمويه واحمد بن عبد الله بن نعيم قالا ابنا ابو نصر احمد بن محمد بن داسة ثنا [الفضل] بن عبد الله بن عبد الجبار ثنا مالك بن سليمان عن ابراهيم بن طهمان عن محمد بن [زياد] عن ابي هريرة ان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم قال إن الله عز وجل يدخل بالسهم [الواحد] ثلاثة الجنة... "', "Title from 'title page' fol.1a (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine early copy of the ḥadīth on the excellences of archery with 'title page' (fol.1a/p.1) ascription statement (isnād) beginning with the author and numerous transmission notices (samāʻāt and qirāʼāt). Description provided by Noah Gardiner."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 938', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 87', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "الفلسفة الذاتية | الفهقاني | J.H.D." ; sewing somewhat difficult to examine, but seemingly in heavy white thread over at least three stations (see p.8, 26, etc.) ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined wove paper of two different types, in two different sizes (compare the fifth gathering, pp.37-52).', "Decoration: Section headings 'rubricated' in a now purplish red ink ; chart / table (jadwal) on p.86 with the four spheres (al-aflāk al-arbaʻah), seven heavens (al-samawāt al-sabaʻ), and four elements (al-ʻanāṣir al-arbaʻah) with corresponding heavenly bodies, names of God, angels, etc.", 'Script: Naskh ; clear hand in a thin to bold line (line thickness and size certainly changes, though appears to have been supplied by same copyist) ; mainly serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline, curvilinear descenders, open and closed counters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 28-34 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, IV (8), V (18), 2 IV(34), 5 V(84), i ; chiefly quinions with a few quaternions ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals accompanied by letter kāf (ك) appearing in the inner lower margin (near the gutter) of the opening recto of each gathering (begins with the third, see pp.1, 17, 37, 53, etc.), supplied in same pencil as original pagination (grey or blue) ; pagination in pencil, Hindu-Arabic numerals (through page ٩٢ grey pencil, from page ٩٣ blue pencil, with exception of pp.139-144) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "اصلا ومنشأ لجميع الصور الانسانية التخطيطية كما كان معنى محمد ص وحقيقته التي هي حقيقة الحقائق منشأ"', 'Incipit: "وان كانت راجعة الى اصول حاصرة كالاسماء الذاتية التي هي مفاتيح الغيب التي كلياتها الحضرات الخمس كما مر ..."', 'Title from inscription in pencil on incipit page (p.1) which attributes the work to Abī Saʻīd al-Farghānī ("الفلسفة الذاتية لابي سعيد الفرغاني").', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful though acephalous and incomplete copy of Muḥammad ibn Ḥamzah al-Fanārī’s commentary on Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Qūnawī’s (d.1274) chief philosophical work Miftāḥ ghayb al-jamʻ wa-al-wujūd, opening in the latter part of al-Aṣl al-rābiʻ and concluding in the opening part of the Khātimah.'])

en: (count: ['On p. [1], illuminated ʻunwān; text rubricated and enclosed in gold borders; marginal finding aids and table of contents in hand of copyist.', 'Date and name of copyist in colophon: yaqūl kātibuhā al-ḥaqīr Muḥammad al-Marʻashī ... qad faraghtu min kitābatihā fī al-sabʻ al-thālith min al-rubʻ al-awwal min al-suds al-sādis min al-niṣf al-thānī min al-khums al-awwal min al-niṣf al-thānī min al-ʻushr al-ʻāshir min al-khums al-thālith min al-niṣf al-awwal min al-alf al-thānī ... sanat 1296 [i.e. November? 1879].', 'Text (not this copy) published.', 'On the view of Islamic law on topics such as divorce, buying and selling, drinking, pilgrimage, etc.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 336', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, etc. suggest 18th or early 19th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "504 [?] T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "١٢" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.1) ; "1/9" inscribed in ink on \'title page\' (p.1).', 'Binding: Boards covered in textured black cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Type III binding though not flush ; board linings and hinges in bright red paper ; sewn in red and lime green thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in lime green and red, good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, quite distinct) and no laid lines apparent, extremely well-burnished to glossy, crisp and transluscent, grayish color ; some pigment burn.', "Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular panel with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral vegetal accents in gold, red, light blue, green, yellow, pink, etc. on fields of 'lapis lazuli' and gold, surmounted by a large (vertically elongated) scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) filled with swirling floral vegetal decoration in gold, pink, blue, green, white, yellow, and red on a gold ground, sumounted by still further domes in lapis and dark maroon, entire piece set into a heavy well of red, lapis (with white cross accents) and turquoise bands defined by gold and black fillets ; gold cloud-bands and floral accents set off basmalah at opening on p.2 written area surrounded by frame consisting of gold bands defined by black fillets and outermost blue rule (columns within and outer margin also defined by gold fillets).", 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; compact, elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes, final ی usually pointed ; partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page with written area mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, 5 IV(40), III (46), IV (54), 4 II(70), i ; mainly quaternions and binions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "یقین داند که صورت عین معنی است"', 'Incipit: "الهی سینۀ ده آتش افروز در ان سینه دلی و ان دل همه سوز ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of Farhād va Shīrīn, one of the mas̲navīs of Vaḥshī Bāfqī (d.1583).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 952', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.380, final gatherings (11-19, from p.203 to close) copied by ʻAbd al-Wahhāb Sulaymān with transcription completed 30 Jumādá II 1200 [ca. 30 April 1786]. Transcription of opening gatherings (through p.202) possibly completed earlier, even early to mid 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 101', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered with shell marbled paper in green-blue, dark blue, red, and yellow with maroon leather over spine, fore edge flap, and board corners ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board lining and endpapers (pasted to opening and closing gatherings) in untinted wove paper ; wrapper binding, case with no signs of attachment, gatherings of text block never sewn though possibly once supported by two strips of leather or textile pasted to the spine (see traces of adhesive) ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; opening section (through p.202) in a few tre lune types, including one with 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-27 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents / tre lune watermark (95 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see pp.10, 16, 46, 60, 68, 78, etc.) another with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents / tre lune watermark (87 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see pp.24, 32, 34, 41, 48, 58, etc.), all quite sturdy, light cream in color, well-burnished ; next section (pp.203-262) in a type with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 26-28 mmm. apart (vertical), and watermarks of double-headed eagle with "FNF" (see pp.210, 212, etc. and compare no.1156 in Nikolaev, Watermarks of the Ottoman Empire, vol.1) and crescent (with human profile) in shield (see pp.204, 208, 222, etc.), quite sturdy, medium cream to buff in color, well-burnished ; final section (p.263 to close) in a type with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 30 mm. apart (horizontal), watermark of crescent (with human profile) in shield (see pp.264, 266, etc.) and countermarks "A G" above "Andrea Galvani Pordenone" in script (see pp.270, 272, etc.),', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and notabilia rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of three dots in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; several Egyptian hands in bold to thin lines ; opening through p.188 in a clear though somewhat awkward hand in a bold line, partially but irregularly seriffed with slight effect of tilt to the right, curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ, some elongation of horizontal strokes ; pp.189-202 in a quicker, more compact and freely ligatured hand in a thin line, partially seriffed with effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline, some sharp, rectilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots ; from p.203 to close a much neater, more careful hand with Turkish features, mainly serifless (though very small serifs appearing occasionally) with effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ ; replacement bifolium (pp.103-104, 121-122) in still a different hand, an elegant Ottoman naskh.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 19 V(190), i ; exclusively quinions ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals below letter ك on recto of opening leaf of each quire ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes endpapers).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تم الكتاب على يد افقر العباد الى الله عز وجل عبد الوهاب سليمان في ليلة الثلاث المبارك ليلة ثلاثين من جمادى اخر من شهور سنة ١٢٠٠ من الهجرة النبوية م وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم والحمد لله وحده"', 'Explicit: "اليه منا ترجع الامور قال تعالى واليه يرجع الامر كله وافضل الصلاة والسلام على النبي المصطفى سيد الانام اي الخلق صلى الله عليه وسلم كلما ذكره الذاكرون"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي وصل من انقطع اليه بدينه القويم ورفع من اسند امره اليه باتباع سنة نبيه الكريم ... وبعد فان الفية علم الحديث المسماة بالتبصرة والتذكرة للشيخ الامام الحافظ شيخ الاسلام ابي الفضل عبد الرحيم زين الدين بن الحسين بن عبد الرحيم بن ابي بكر ابن ابراهيم العراقي لما اشتملت علي نقول عجيبة ومسائل غريبة ... طلب مني بعض الاعزة ... ان اضع عليها شرحا ... وسميته بفتح الباقي بشرح الفية العراقي ..."', 'Title from opening on p.4.', 'Ms. composite codex.', "Elegant copy of the commentary by Zayn al-Dīn Zakarīyā ibn Muḥammad al-Anṣārī al-Sunaykī (d. ca. 1520) upon al-ʻIrāqī's al-Alfīyah fī ʻilm al-ḥadīth or Tabṣirat al-mubtadiʼ wa-tadhkirat al-muntahī or al-Maqāṣid al-muhmalah, itself a versification of Kitāb Maʻrifat anwāʻ ʻilm (‘ulūm) al-ḥadīth or ʻUlūm al-ḥadīth of ‘Uthmān Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ al-Shahrazūrī (d.1243)."])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Andrea Galvani of Pordenone; initials EAN in roman; three Face-in-the-moons arranged horizontally. For the first two, see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), nos. 860 and 2595.', 'In Maghribī script.', 'Text rubricated; marginal notes and corrections by copyist.', 'Date and provenance in colophon: yawm al-jumʻah sabʻah Shawwāl fī ʻām sabʻah wa-sabʻīn wa-alf [2 April 1667] bi-madīnat Fās al-maḥrūsah.', "Author's commentary on his al-Yawāqīt li-mubtaghī maʻrifat al-mawāqīt, a poem on timekeeping."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 527', "Origin: As appears at opening on p.15, composition completed in the first part of Rabīʻ I 1122 [May 1710]. Lacks scribal colophon, though perhaps transcribed before the author's death in 1749. Paper certainly suggests 18th century and date of transcription for closing text provides a terminus ante quem of 1783. As appears in colophon on p.197, subsequent text listing the ṣaḥābah or Companions of the Prophet who took part in the battle of Badr copied by Ibrāhīm al-Ḥamāṣī ( ابراهيم الحماصي ) in Muḥarram 1198 [November-December 1783].", 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 265" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in tan leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OSd 3 and OSd 9), pendants and corner pieces ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in magenta and light yellow, good condition ; overall in fair condition though with considerable abrasion, some staining, etc. and ill-fitting (fore edge flap far too small and perhaps shrunk).', 'Support: European laid paper, mainly with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of grapes (raisin) with cartouche and crown above (see p.28, 54, 110, etc.), thin and transluscent, beige in color, lightly burnished ; another type with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 21-22 mm. apart (vertical) and crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.156) ; some staining.', 'Decoration: Keywords, notabilia (side-heads), and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs and three inverted commas.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, somewhat stiff Syrian [?] hand ; partially seriffed with occasional right-sloping head-serifs on free-standing alif, deviating little from vertical, elongation of horizontal strokes, curvilinear descenders, some sweeping tails, pointing mainly in distinct dots though shīn marked with rightward-tilting inverted caret, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ, kāf mashqūqah preferred, lām-alif ligature often forming a closed loop ; list of the Companions who took part in the battle of Badr in a different hand.', 'Layout: Written in 15 and 9 lines per page ; for sections in verse written area divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iv, 8 V(80), VI+1 (93), II+1 (98) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes added flyleaves and inserts).', 'Colophon: [Aṣḥāb Badr] "محرره الفقير الحقير ابراهيم الحماصي الاصل نهار الخميس ... محرم في سنة ١١٩٨"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي اورد [من اراد] المقام المورود وخص اهل الاوراد من العباد بنفحات الجود ... وبعد فاعلم ايها المريد الملازم على اقتطاف ازهار الاوراد من رياض الامداد في حضرة الاسعاد اني لما رايت النفوس متعشقة في ذلك راغبة فيما هنالك لتنوير المسالك عز [عن] لي ان اضع للاخوان وردا يقتبسون من نوره في حندس الاوهام ... فهذا ورد يتلي في السحر نافع ان شاء الله تعالى لمن واظب عليه مع التدبر لمعانيه والتفهم لمبانيه فتح به على العبد الفقير والعاجز الحقير مصطفى بن كمال الدين بن علي بن كمال الدين الصديقي نسبا الخلوتي طريقة الحنفي مذهبا وكان ذلك في اوائل شهر ربيع الاول ايام زيارتنا لبيت المقدس في سنة الف ومائة واثنين وعشرين وسميته بالفتح القدسي والكشف الانسي والمنهج القريب الى لقاء الحبيب وكمل في مجلس لطيف واضفت اليه بعد ذلك قصيدة ميمية فتح بها علي سابقا وصلوات على النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم زدتهم الان وقصيدتي التي سميتها سابقا بالمنبلجة في الطريقة المنبلجة التي على وزن المتفرجة وزدته بعض توسلات وقد رتبته على حروف المعجم في اوائل توسلاته ليوكن ذلك اسهل في حفظ كلماته ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from 'title page' (p.13) and opening matter on (p.15).", 'Ms. codex.', '5. p.198-p.208 : [mainly blank, with an inventory, etc. in pencil].', '4. p.174-p.197 : [Aṣḥāb Badr].', '3. p.173 : [blank].', '2. p.13-p.172 : al-Fatḥ al-qudsī wa-al-kashf al-unsī wa-al-manhaj al-qarīb ilá liqāʼ al-ḥabīb / Muṣṭafá ibn Kamāl al-Dīn ibn ʻAlī al-Ṣiddīqī al-Khalwatī al-Ḥanafī al-Bakrī.', '1. p.5-p.12 : [blank].', 'Fine copy of the prayerbook of the Arab author and mystic Muṣṭfá ibn Kamāl al-Dīn ibn ʻAlī al-Ṣiddīqī al-Khalwatī al-Ḥanafī al-Bakrī (d.1749) including al-Fatḥ al-Qudsī or Wird al-saḥar followed by a list of the ṣaḥābah or Companions of the Prophet who took part in the battle of Badr.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 431', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.16, executed by Sulṭān ʻAlī [possibly Sulṭān ʻAlī Mashhadī?] ; date of transcription not specified ; decoration, hand, etc. suggest early 16th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "450 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of both front flyleaves.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark purple leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in light-blue textured paper ; upper and lower covers bear gold-painted central floral motif with tooled borders in gold (two different shades) ; sewn in heavy yellow thread, four stations ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of leather and paper, etc.', 'Support: Written area mounted in lovely silhouette paper (floral designs in pink) in leaves of non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct) and no chain lines visible, thin and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished ; some staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche and surrounding floral vegetal accents in gold, red, lavender, orange, pink, light blue, white, etc. on a field of lapis lazuli bordered in bands of lapis, gold and orange-red, surmounted by a scalloped triangular piece or hasp set in a narrow rectangular piece continuing the floral vegetal design and itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in lapis lazuli ; written area throughout surrounded by frame in bands of green and gold with outermost blue rule ; panels within written area (and entire written area of incipit page) gold-flecked ; ḥadīth text in light-blue and white ink.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless with characteristic descent of words to baseline and superscripting of final words and letters ; elongation of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in roughly 9 lines per page, three of ḥadīth text and six of the Persian verse paraphrase with the hemistiches of four lines of verse divided and arranged on the diagonal ; written area divided to set off the ḥadīth text and elucidation ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, IV (8), ii ; single quaternion ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "احقر العباد سلطان على"', 'Explicit: "ومن كلامه صلى الله عليه و آله لا يشبع المؤمن من دون جاره هر که در خطه مسلمانی باشد از نقد دین گر انمایه ... تمت ترجمه هذه الاربعين بتوفيق من هو ناصر ومعين سنه ست و ثمانين و ثمانمائة متع الله بها كل فريق فيه و الحمد لله على الاتمام و الصلوه و السلام على محمد و آله البررة الكرام اربعینهاى سالکان جامی هست بهر وصول صدر قبول منست از فضل حق عجیب و غریب که بدین اربعین رسی بوصول"', 'Incipit: "صحیح ترین حدیثى که راویان مجالس دین ... این چهل کلمه است ازان کلمات که سهولت فهم و حفظ را بنظم فارسی ترجمه گر ده مي آید امید ... لا يؤمن احدكم حتى يحب لاخيه ما يحب لنفسه هر کسی را لقب مکن مؤمن گرچه از سعی جان وتن کاهد ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Exquisite copy of Jāmī's verse paraphrase of forty ḥadīth, possibly executed by renowned Timurid calligrapher Sulṭān ʻAlī Mashhadī (d.1520)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 45', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.131, transcription finished ("qad istarāḥa qalam al-tabyīḍ ʻan al-taswīd..." see p.129) 15th Jumādá I 1173 [ca. 4 January 1760]. The copyist is not identified. The author is named on fol.1b (p.2) and appears to be the Aḥmad ibn ʻUmar ibn Ayyūb al-Izmīrī named by Kaḥḥālah (see ed. Dimashq, 1957 p.29).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No.5. Hizb al-bahr, with commentary."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in laid paper with red leather for spine and turn-ins ; Type II binding (with flap) though flap now missing ; board linings in yellow European laid paper, hinges in brown leather ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped central panel in lozenge shape filled with floral design ; sewing in red thread, two stations ; only traces of primaries (in yellow) remain, otherwise endbands lost ; in fair condition though upper cover is detaching from spine, much abrasion, staining, and some delaminating of boards.', 'Support: European laid paper with chain lines running horizontally evenly spaced roughly 24 mm. apart and laid lines running vertically spaced roughly 12 laid lines per cm. ; highly burnished with burnishers marks evident ; three hats watermark (compare Heawood 2596-2599) visible in second to final quire particularly (see p.108, 110, etc.) ; scrollwork / shield watermark partially visible also.', 'Decoration: Simple illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) on fol.1b (p.2) consisting of rectangular piece with empty cartouche surmounted by semicircular piece with floral vegetal design in pink and gold, surmounted by gold stalks ; decorative frame on incipit and facing page consists of a series of gold bands and black fillets, thereafter a plain rule-border in red ink ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; text rubricated with section headings, key words, textudal dividers, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Turkish hand ; mainly serifless with occasional left sloping head serif on alif of lām alif ligature ; rounded with a very slight tilt to the left.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 6 V (60), IV-1 (67) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during digitization).', 'Colophon: "Scribal", triangular, reads: "قد استراح قلم التبييض عن التسويد ومن الله التكميل بالقبول والتسديد وله الحمد على جميع نعمه بلا غاية ولا تحديد ... تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب سنة ۱۱۷۳ في ۱٥ جمادى الاولى"', 'Explicit: "رب العالمين خالق الخلائق ومصلحها وسيدها"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعل ... العلماء العارفين احرازا في [؟] ... وبعد فيقول الفقير الى الغني القدير احمد بن عمر الداعى في الازمير [؟] عفا عنهما العلي الكبير لما كان الحزب الجليل والحرز الجميل لامامنا الكامل الجلي الشيخ ابو الحسن الشاذلي ... ومع هذا قد شرحه المتبحرون واقتفى اثرهم المقلدون لكن لم يشهر منها ما يروى الجنان التمس منى بعض الاخوان زاد كما لاتهم الملك المنان ان اكتب عليه نبذة من الفرائد ... و لما تم بحمد الله الاكبر سميته فتح العلي البر شرح الحزب البحر ... ثم ان شيخنا ..."', 'Title from inscription on fol.1a (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', "Early fair copy of Aḥmad ibn ʻUmar al-Izmīrī's commentary on al-Shādhilī's popular Ḥizb al-baḥr."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 887', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.653 (partially obscured), transcription completed 6 Shawwāl 1113 [?] [ca. 6 March 1702 ?]. As appears in opening matter on p.16, composition apparently dated to 991 [1583].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Scrap with inscription in black ink "Fatḥ-nāma fī ʻilm al-Lughat | Not found in any cat of mss. or in any list of dicts." (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Recycled card with notes in hand of Emilie Savage-Smith [?] "grammar/dictionary | one lang. is Persian" (paginated pp.3-4) -- c. Slip with note "counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" (paginated pp.5-6) -- d. Slip with note "Persian Manuscripts (Heyworth-Dunne?) No Husselman or Meredith-Owens notes" (paginated pp.7-8).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 36', "Binding: Boards covered in shell 'marbled' paper (mainly in blue and orange) with dark blue cloth over spine and board corners (nearly half binding) ; Type III binding (without flap), though with rounded spine and not flush with text block ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted wove paper ; sewn over five recessed cords ; overall in fair condition with some lifting of paper and cloth, deformation of boards, etc.", 'Support: non-European (likely Indian or Persian) laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (vertical or horizontal, somewhat indistinct, some curving) and chain lines occasionally faintly visible (see p.24, etc.), quite cloudy formation, thin and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished, beige to light brown in color.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; clear, compact hand in a medium line ; serifless with effect of words descending to baseline and inclining to the right, pointing for three dots often in strokes, many closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, bar (shaqq) of kāf typically sweeping dramatically, partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iii, 38 IV (304), V (314), IV-2 (320), iii (per mid-quire marks) ; almost exclusively quaternions ; lacuna on p.207 marked with "بيض" ; middle of the quire marks in the form of black oblique strokes in the upper-outer corner of the right-hand leaf and the lower-outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, centered above the written area on the recto of each leaf (apart from that carrying the incipit page) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," "سنه ۱۱۱۳ هجرى قد فرغت عن كتابة هذه النسخة المسماة بالفتحنامه فى علم اللغة فى يوم السادس من شهر الشوال ... الحمد لله الحمد لله على توفيقه ..."', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذى علم القرآن خلق الانسان علمه البيان وجعل علم اللغات مفاتيح الاذهان ومصابيح الاكنان ... قال الفقير العاصى ابو الخير بن سعد الانصارى تلميذونى من تلاميذ عالم العلم عارف ربانى الياس بن اسرائيل الحسينى ... فافتحتت [فافتحت ؟] كتابا يكون مجموعا بلغات العربى والعجمى فى عمل فتخان ... ضمته [؟] فيه بتوفيق الله عالم الغيب والشهادة فى الحادى تسعين وتسعمائة وجمعته على عدد الحروف بالابواب واوردت فصلين كل باب وسميته فتح الكتاب وحليت ووسمت كل لغة عربية مداولة وفسرت العجمى بالعربى كما فسرت بالعجمى ..."', "Title from inscription 'title page' (p.15).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of an Arabic-Persian dictionary by Abū al-Khayr ibn Saʻd al-Anṣārī (fl. 1583).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 130', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; paper may suggest late 18th or early 19th century. As appears in authorial colophon on p.722, composition completed 5 Ramaḍān 1168 [ca. 15 June 1755].', 'Accompanying materials: Slips with notes (paginated pp.289-290 and pp.429-430).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 42. Commentary on Kafiyah."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark maroon leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in yellow laid paper ; flyleaves in orange laid paper ; upper and lower covers bears blind-stamped and gold-painted scalloped mandorla and pendants with floral vegetal composition (compare Déroche class. NSd 7), accompanied by tooled and gold-painted accents and guilloché roll border, design continues on fore-edge flap and envelope flap ; sewn in mauve thread, two stations ; worked endbands in pink and yellow, damaged but intact ; in fair to poor condition with minor abrasion, lifting and losses of leather at spine and fore-edge flap, though upper cover completely is detached and spine is split (textblock held together by headband only) ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines spaced 25 mm. apart (vertical) ; roughly first half of quires well-burnished to glossy ; watermark and/or countermark with name or initials only partially visible.', 'Decoration: Elegant headpiece (ʻunwān) in red and pink on incipit page (p.2) consisting of rectangular piece carrying the basmalah, surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) filled with floral decoration and itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) ; keywords, section headings, abbreviations, and notabilia (side-heads) rubricated ; overlining and occasional textual dividers in the form of discs in red ; written area surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, well-formed Turkish hand ; seriffed with mainly right-sloping head serifs on virtually all vertical shafts, even free-standing alif ; slight effect of tilt to the left ; open and closed counters.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 36 V(360), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (begins with ۱) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," rectangular, reads: " فلاستراح [كذا] من مكد الانتهاض نقل هذا المعرب من السواد الى البياض العبد الفقير حسين بن احمد الشهير بزين زاده ... قبيل عصر السبت الخامس من ايام رمضان المنتظم في سلك شهور سنة ثمان وستين ومائة والف من هجرة من ارتدى بالعز والشرف ... تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب والحمد لله رب العالمين حسبي الله وكفي"', 'Explicit: "اللهم كما انعمت علينا باعراب هذا الكتاب واتممت نعمتك باتمام على وجه الصواب اجعله رافعيا للعقاب ... يقول الفقير الى الملك العزيز هذا اخر ما اوردناه من الاعراب على كتاب الكافية التي هي للمشكلات الشافية ..."', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله على نعمة الكافية الوافية ومتنه الشافية الصافية ... اما بعد فيقول الراجي من ربه الحسنى والزيادة حسين بن احمد الشهير بزين زاده ... لما كان كتاب الكافية للشيخ ابن الحاجب اوصله الله سبحانه الى اعلى المراتب من احسن ما صنف في علم الاعراب ... حتى سنح لبالي وحضر لروعي ان اكتب كلمات متعلقة ... فاجبت مسؤله وكتبت مأموله وسميته بالفوائد الشافية على اعراب الكافية ..."', 'Title from opening (p.3).', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of the commentary by Ḥusayn ibn Aḥmad Zaynīʻzādah on Ibn al-Ḥājib's grammatical treatise on naḥw (syntax)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 129', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.226a, copied by Murād Aṣl ibn ʻAbd Allāh. Copy completed ("khatamtu hādhā [kadhā] al-nuskhah...") in the year 1165 [1751 or 1752] or possibly 1149 [1736 or 1737]. Reading is questionable, though 1165 may fit better with the claim that the copy was completed in the time of Arslan Giray Han (ruled 1748-1756). Scribal verses adjacent to colophon read "الخط باقى والعمر فانى والعبد عاصى والرب عافى."', 'Accompanying materials: Numerous inserted slips, some with writing some without, between fol. 23 and 24, fol. 47 and 48, fol. 48 and 49, fol. 105 and 106, fol. 134 and 135, fol. 193 and 194.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London. "No. 122. Jami\'s commentary on the Kafiyah."', 'Binding: Pasteboard covered in black leather; Type II (with flap); upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped central mandorla and cornerpieces (design worn and no longer clearly visible but comparable to Déroche class. NA) along with decorative vegetal border and blind-tooled accents; pastedowns of pink paper; in good condition.', 'Support: European laid paper; chain lines visible and running horizontally, spaced about 27 mm. apart; laid lines running vertically and spaced roughly 7 laid lines per cm; several quires in a second European laid paper with chain lines running horizontally and spaced roughly 23-24 mm. apart, laid lines running vertically spaced roughly 6-7 laid lines per cm.', 'Decoration: Red rule-border frames portions of text and glosses.', 'Script: Naskh, with influence of nastaʻlīq (talik); at least four or five distinct hands: hand of the first quire (fol. 1 - 10), hand of the eighth quire (fol. 124 - 134), hand of fol. 135 to the end, hand of fol. 70 to 89, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 17 to 19 lines per page; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: VI (12), 14 V (162), 4 IV (194), 5 III (214), 2 II (222), 2 I (226), 1 (227); catchwords present; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (referenced in cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "ختمت هذا [كذا] النسخة الشريفة المباركة في يوم بشنبه وفي [الوقت ص] العشاء وفي مدرسة مصر ومدرسة باي محمد افندي وفي زمان ارسلان كراي خان خلد الله ملكه وسلطانته كاتبه مراد اصل الحقير الفقير المحتاج رحمة الله عليه اجمعين تاريخ سنة ١١٤٩ [؟]', 'Explicit: "قد استراح من مكد الانتهاض لنقل هذا الشرح من السواد الى البياض العبد الفقير عبد الرضى عن الخير [؟] ... صاحب ومالك مراد اصل بن عبد الله كتبه مراد اصل ..."', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله لوليه والصلوة على نبيه ... اما بعد فهذه فوائد وافية بحل مشكلات الكافية للعلامة المشتهر في المشارق "والمغارب الشيخ ابن الحاجب', 'Title from opening on fol.1b.', 'Ms. codex.', "Jāmī's commentary, written for his son Ḍiyāʼ al-Dīn Yūsuf and also called al-Fawāʼid al-Ḍiyāʼīyah, on ʻUthmān ibn ʻUmar Ibn al-Ḥājib's grammar, al-Kāfiyah. Description provided by Alison Vacca."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 490', 'Origin: As appears in authorial colophon on p.377, transcription of the fair copy (tabyīḍ) completed 5 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1139 [ca. 24 July 1727]. Collation (muqābalah) was first completed 1 Rajab 1141 [ca. 31 January 1729], followed by a second examination/correction (murājaʻah) completed at the beginning of Jumādá II [?] 1142 [December 1729] and finally a third 3 Rabīʻ II 1162 [ca. 23 March 1749]. Date of transcription for this copy not specified, though paper, etc. suggest early 19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.1-2).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, "IL 20" [?] (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (mainly in red and yellow) with dark red-brown leather over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins (framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings (doublures) in marbled paper (mainly in teal and red) ; sewn in cream thread, two stations, also stab sewn in heavy cream thread ; worked chevron endbands in cream and lime-green over red primaries with red leather core, damaged ; overall in somewhat poor condition with cover serving as a wrapper for textblock (too large, not original, likely here reused), much abrasion and staining, lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23 and 24 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks including lion rampant in coat of arms / scrollwork flanked by beasts with "F P below" (see p.368, 374, etc.) and name "PICARDO" (see p.391 and compare paper of C46a. MS. Shelley adds. c.5, fols. 113, 116-118 dated 1823 in Barker-Benfield, Shelleyan writing materials in the Bodleian Library, pp.86-87) ; transluscent, sturdy and quite well burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Some section headings, keywords and passages of text being commented upon rubricated ; others in yellow-orange ; textual dividers in the form red discs and inverted commas ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Maghribī script ; elegant hand with slight effect of tilt to the right, sweeping descenders, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame ruled (impression of ruling board visible).', 'Collation: i, 19 V (190), i ; exclusively quinions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of mark looking like numeral sittah ۶ in upper outer margin of right-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert and front flyleaf, skips two pages each between pp.223-224 and pp.233-234).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," reads: "قال مقيده عبد الله تعالى وافقر عبيده الى رحمته محمد بن قاسم بن بمحمد بن قاسم بن احمد جسوس كان الله تعالى له ولوالديه ولجميع المسلمين دنيا واخرى هذا اخر ما تيسر جمعه من الفوائد الجليلة البهية على الشمائل المحمدية وافق الفراغ من تبييض ذلك خامس الحجة الحرام ... عام تسعة وثلاثين ومائة والف ونسأل الله تعالى ان ينفعنا وسائر المسلمين به وان يجعله خالصا لوجه الكريم والحمد لله وكفى وسلام على عباده الذين اصفطى كتب المؤلف الحمد لله بلغنا مقابلته اول رجب الفرد الحرام من سنة احدى واربعين ومائة والف تقبل الله ذلك بمنه ثم بلغنا مراجعته مرة ثانية اوائل الشهر قبله من سنة اثنين واربعين ومائة جعل الله ذلك من اعمال المتقبلة بمنه وامين ثم مرة ثالثة ثالث ربيع الثاني من عام اثنين وستين ومائة والف تقبل الله سبحانه ذلك بجاه هذا النبي الكريم عليه افضل الصلوات وازكى التسليم والحمد لله رب العالمين اللهم اغفر لنا ولوالدينا ولجميع المسلمين امين ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم ... والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Explicit: "قوله صلى الله عليه وسلم من صافح عالما صادقا فكانما صافح نبينا مرسلا اماتنا الله تعالى على محبتهم وحشرنا في زمرتهم وجعلنا والمتمسكين بعزيمهم وسنتهم امين يا رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "قال الشيخ الامام العلامة الهمام سيد محمد بن قاسم جسوس رحمه الله تعالى ورضي عنه واكرمه بمنه الحمد لله الذي اودع ابرع شمائل زين الخلائق ... فلما كان كتاب الشمائل من اجل ما الف في محاسن قطب الوسائل ومنبع الفضائل وكان الانشغال به خدمة لشفيع الخلائق ... وقد اعتمرنا في مواضع كثيرة وهذا الشرح المبارك على شرح الشيخ الامام البحر الهمام سيد علي بن سلطان الحنفي رحمه الله تعالى المسمى بجمع الوسائل في شرح الشمائل ..."', 'Title from authorial colophon on p.377.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine Maghribī of the commentary by Muḥammad ibn Qāsim Jassūs (d.1768), modeled on the basis of the commentary by ʻAlī ibn Sulṭān al-Qārī al-Harawī (d.1605 or 6), upon al-Tirmidhī’s (d.892) Shamā’il, a collection of traditions comprising the Prophet’s characteristics.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 52', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.159b (p.326), copied by ʻAbd al-Raḥīm ibn Ḥasan ibn Ibrāhīm with transcription finished ("qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min tanmīq [al-sharḥ?] al-sharīf...") 20 Rabīʻ II 1180 [ca. 25 September 1766]. In the same hand, colophon for the previous exemplar transcribed by one Muṣṭafá ibn Muḥammad is included prior to the colophon for this ms. (see fol.159a-159b/p.325-326).', 'Accompanying materials: Several inserted slips carrying portions of text on the Prophet, etc. some paginated (pp.99-102/folded, pp.209-210, pp.331-332), one scrap carrying text (between p.136-137) and a full folded document (between p.118-119) not paginated.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 35. Al-Faiz al-arham." ; on tail edge of textblock "٣٠١".', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red-brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in yellow paper ; upper and lower covers carry central diamond motif and cornerpieces in blind-tooled rosettes with incised fillet border and accents ; sewn in salmon thread, two stations ; chevron endbands in pink and cream ; in fair condition with abrasion, staining, some cracking of spine leather, and spine slant (cocked) ; several loose leaves.', 'Support: European laid paper with 13 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and single chain lines spaced 22 mm. apart (horizontal) ; watermarks include scrollwork with crown above and lion rampant within as well as "FC" in circle with trefoil-like motifs above and below ; well-burnished and fairly smooth ; added leaves ruled for table of contents in a different European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and notabilia (side-heads) rubricated ; overlining in red ; written area and margin surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Turkish (?) hand ; virtually serifless ; slight effect of tilt to the left ; many closed counters ; occasional effect of words descending to baseline ; partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling-board evident).', 'Collation: i, IV (8), 15 V(158), I (160), i ; chiefly quinions ; added quaternion ruled for table of contents precedes text ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, begins with ۱ on incipit page (mistakenly skips two pages between١٩٥ and ۱٩٦ and again between ۲٥۸ and ۲٥٩, mistakenly repeats ۲۲٥ and ٢٤٣); pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and some inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "اعلم ان المصنف رحمه الله تعالى ختم الصلوة الشريفة على محمد صلى الله عليه وسلم بهذه الآية الكريمة خاتمة تشريفة ... قد وقفنا بتحرير هذه النسخة بالاتمام وحقق لنا الفوز بهذا المرام والحمد لله على كمال لطفه ... وانا العبد الضعيف الفقير الى غفران رحمة ربه القدير مصطفى بن محمد غفر لهما الله الصمد مع الذين انعمت عليهم ... وقد وقع الفراغ من تنميق [الشرح؟] الشريف على يد افقر عبيد العلام عبد الرحيم بن الحاج حسن بن ابراهيم غفر الله لهم ولوالديهم ولاجدادهم ولاستاذهم ولاخوانهم ولاحبائهم ولجميع المؤمنين والمؤمنات بحرمة من له العز والشرف لسنة ثمانين ومائة والف في اليوم العشرين من ربيع الاخرة الله اعلم"', 'Explicit: "والمراد تنبيه المؤمنين على كيفية تسبيحه وتحميده التسليم على رسله هم وسائط بينهم وبينه في فيضان الكلمات الدينية والدنيوية عليهم كذا في الارشاد"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي اعد للقانتين والمسبحين مثوبة ... وبعد فلما كان الحزب الاعظم والورد الافخم المنسوب الى الرسول الاكرم صلى الله عليه وسلم جامعا للدعوات المأثورة التي فيها المتابعة المحمدية ... ولكنه محتاج الى كشف اسرار معانيه ... فخطر بالي ان اشرحه شرحا محتويا لما يحتاج اليه فاستخرت الله متضرعا اليه ان يجعله خالصا لوجهه الكريم ... وسميته فيض الارحم وفتح الاكرم على الحزب الاعظم والورد الافخم ..."', 'Title from opening on fol.9b (p.20).', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of al-Qārī al-Harawī's own commentary upon his collection of prayers, al-Ḥizb al-aʻẓam wa-al-wird al-afkham."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 683', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. suggests 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From verso of front flyleaf "IL 362" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark purple cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in paper printed with floral / landscape design in shades of blue, tan, olive green, and white ; upper and lower covers carry embossed central ornament (oval scrollwork design) ; raised bands on spine, accented with stamped (turquoise-colored onlays) bands and floral motifs ; sewn in white thread, five stations, stab sewn as well ; stuck-on endbands in black and yellow ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion and staining.', 'Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (vertical), and watermarks of crown above grapes (see p.20, 24, etc.) alternating with "P S" (see p.22, 26, etc.), thin though sturdy, well-burnished, dark cream to beige in color ; some foxing, staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.10 consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by lavender floral motifs surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) filled with swirling floral vegetal motifs in lavender, pink, salmon, white, etc. on a gold ground, entire piece surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and red and set in a well of pink with red accents ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by gold frame, elsewhere written area (including margin) surrounded by red rule-border ; keywords, section headings and abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke over keywords) rubricated ; grid of table of contents outlined in red ; textual dividers in the form of gold discs on incipit and facing page ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; two elegant Turkish hands ; opening two works in an elegant nastaʻlīq (talik), characteristically serifless with effect of tilt to the right and of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, letterforms characteristic of nastaʻlīq (talik) ; final work in another nastaʻlīq (talik) similar to the first hand but with greater effect of words descending to baseline, thicker line and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 29 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV (8), V (18), V+1 (29), 23 V(259), i ; chiefly quinions ; fol.110-111 and 112-113 bound in reverse order ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (includes flyleaves).', 'Incipit: [Fetava-yi Ali Efendi] "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على سيدنا محمد واله كتاب الطيبين الطاهرين الطهارة [الطيبين الطاهرين كتاب الطهارة] زيد جنب ايكن ذكر وتسبيح والصلوة على النبى ايتمك جائز اولورمى الجواب اولور ..." ; [Tarjīḥ al-bayānāt] ; "الحمد لله عظيم البرهان وعميم الاحسان ... فان افقر عباد الله السبحان عبد السيد الرحمن بن سليمان الشهير بخصالى بين الاجناب والاخوان قد اختصر هذا الرسالة بحسب الامكان في الكتب المعتبرة البيان ..." ; [Maruzat-ı Ebussuud] "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على سيدنا خاتم النبيين وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين اما بعد سعادتلى وفضيلتلى ومروتلى سلطانم حضرتلرينه عرض داعى منشالرى بو در كه بوندن اقدم مرحوم سيخ الاسلام ... حضرت ابو السعود ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '7. p.519-520 : [assorted excerpts].', '6. p.504-p.518 : [Maruzat-ı Ebussuud] / Ebussuud Efendi.', '5. p.482-p.503 : Tarjīḥ al-bayānāt / ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Sulaymān, al-shahīr bi-Khilāṣī.', '4. p.478-p.481 : [blank].', '3. p.10-p.477 : Fetava-yi Ali Efendi / Ali Efendi Çatalcalı.', '2. p.8-p.9 : [blank].', '1. p.3-p.7 : [added contents listing and table of contents].', 'Fine copy of the collection of legal decisions (fetvas) by Ali Efendi (d.1692), followed by Tarjīḥ al-bayānāt, a work of fiqh in Arabic by Hisâlî Abdurrahman Çelebî bin Süleyman bin Eyüp Sârûhânî (d.1676) and Maruzat-ı Ebussuud, a collection of legal decisions (fetvas) issued by Abū al-Suʻūd al-ʻImādī (Ebussuud Efendi, d.1574) and sanctioned by Sultan Süleyman I (r.1520-1566).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 69', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.268b (p.537), copied ("ḥarrarahu...") by Aḥmad ibn Rajab ibn Bāyazīd al-Qaramānī. Transcription finished 4 Muḥarram 1149 [ca. 15 May 1736].', 'Accompanying materials: Slip carrying notes between pp.214-215 (not paginated).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 150. Legal decisions of Abd al-Ghani."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather ; Type II binding (with flap, flap now lost) ; board linings in laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla with floral vegetal composition ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; endbands in light blue and cream, fair condition ; overall in poor condition with much abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, loss of flap, upper cover detaching, etc. ; repairs in brown leather.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; early quires in a European paper having 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (horizontal), horn (?) watermark ; other quires in another thinner European paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart, scrollwork with pedestal watermark and "A C" countermark ; some leaves in still another European paper with 14 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart, watermark with grapes ; not heavily burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, sigla, and occasional notabilia (side-heads) rubricated ; overlining and textual dividers in the form of discs in red ; written area surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; characteristically sans serif with effect of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, occasional sweeping descenders and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 2 V(20), VI (32), 15 V(182), V+2 (194), 7 V(264), 2 IV(280) ; chiefly quinions ; final quire following treatise of Abū al-Suʻūd mainly left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (begins with ۲۹٦ on opening folio of text/fol.2a/p.5) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaf, skips two pages between pp.505-506, skips p.536).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "حرره الفقير اليه سبحانه وتعالى احمد المدعو بمولانا ابن رجب [؟] بن بايزيد القرمانى رحمهم الله عليهم وعلى سائر الاقرباء والاصدقاء سنة تسع واربعين ومائة والف في اليوم الاربع من محرم الحرام"', 'Explicit: "حد قديم نه در الجواب برامردركه اولنى بيلور اولميه حد القديم ما لا يحفظه القران من محيط البرهاني في كتاب ما يمنع عنه الانسان ما لا يمنع. تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب"', 'Incipit: "باب الاجازة المؤجلة و المعجلة ... اقجه بدل [؟] مقابله سنده فراغ وتسليم ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '4. fol.273a-fol.280b : [all but one leaf carrying an excerpt blank].', '3. fol.268b-fol.272b : Maruzat-ı Ebussuud / Abū al-Suʻūd.', '2. fol.2a-fol.268b : [Fetava-yı Ataullah] / Minkarizade Yahya Efendi and Ataullah Mehmet Efendi.', '1. fol.1b : [table of contents].', 'Despite spine and edge titles, appears to be an odd second volume of the collection of legal decisions (fetvas) of Minkarizade Yahya Efendi (d.1678) compiled by Ataullah Mehmet Efendi (d.1715), beginning in the latter part of Kitāb al-ijāzāt. Followed by Maruzat-ı Ebussuud, the collection of legal decisions (fetvas) issued by Abū al-Suʻūd al-ʻImādī (Ebussuud Efendi, d.1574) and sanctioned by Sultan Süleyman I (r.1520-1566).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 68', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.772, transcription finished 29 Rabīʻ II 1125 [ca. 25 May 1713].', 'Accompanying materials: Numerous inserts have been paginated including a few documents, scraps carrying notes or glosses, an entire bifolium from another manuscript, etc. ; several half-sheets, mainly blank, have been sewn in (see pp.147-148, pp.199-200, pp.475-476, etc.).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 135. Legal decisions of Muh. Ata Allah."', 'Binding: Limp dark brown leather (unusual grain) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; linings in laid paper ; upper and lower covers bear blind-tooled floral motifs for the central ornament, border and cornerpieces where they resemble carnations ; sewn in a red thread, two stations, though sewing often gone ; endbands entirely gone apart from traces of primaries ; in extremely poor condition with significant abrasion, moisture damage, shrinkage (lower cover in particular, which is quite ill-fitting), losses of spine leather, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines spaced 26-28 mm. apart ; flower (?) watermark ; much staining ; moisture and or oil damage ; burn (acidic?) to edges.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; overlining and textual dividers in the form of discs in red ; written area in first few quires surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; bold Turkish hand ; sans serif with effect of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, many sweeping descenders and elongated horizontal strokes, exaggerated contrast in line thickness between horizontal and vertical strokes ; single quire near the end of the text (pp.623-642) supplied in a different hand, being quite a neat Ottoman naskh.', 'Layout: Written in 29 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, III (6), VI (18), 34 V(358), V-8 (360), IV (368) ; chiefly quinions ; third quire from last appears to be missing (between pp.752-753, compare catchwords and foliation) ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaf and inserts, skips two pages each between pp.19-20, pp.109-110, pp.239-240).', 'Colophon: "Scribal", rectangular, reads: "تمت الكتاب في شهر ربيع الاخر في ٢٩ سنة خمس وعشرين ومائة والف "', 'Explicit: "حد قديم نه در الجواب برامردركه اولنى بيلور اولميه حد القديم ما لا يحفظه القران من محيط البرهاني في كتاب ما يمنع عنه الانسان ما لا يمنع. تم الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله واصحابه اجمعين والحمد لله رب العالمين تم الكتاب"', 'Incipit: "حمد وسپاس وشكر بى قياس خداى لا يزالى [كذا] لا يزاله كه اختراع كرده انواع انسان"', 'Title from inscription on incipit page (p.18).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Well-annotated and quite early copy of the collection of fatwás of Minkarizade Yahya Efendi compiled by Ataullah Mehmet Efendi (d.1715).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 376', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.460, copied from the sound copy in the possession of Şeyhülislam Ahmet Ârif Hikmet Bey Efendi ( احمد عارف حكمت بك افندى , d.1859, son of İbrahim İsmet Bey Efendi) by the son of (Necl) Meşrepzade [Meşrebzade] Ali Raik ( نجل مشرب زاده على رائق / Najl Mashrabʻzādah ʻAlī Rāʼiq) with transcription completed 3 Ṣafar 1264 [January 1848].', 'Accompanying materials: Piece of yellow-tinted European laid paper carrying a sample of calligraphy in naskh (nesih) executed by Mustafa known as Bektaş Ağazade (مصطفى الشهير ببكتاش اغا زاده) found between pp.272-273.', 'Former shelfmark: "357 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf (p.2).', "Binding: Pasteboards covered in green leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in gold-flecked pink 'marbled' paper ; upper and lower covers carry exquisite recessed stamped (with gold-painted recessed onlays) mandorla filled with vegetal composition (compare Déroche class. NSd) and pendants with tooled rosette and gold-painted accents, as well as tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; design continues on flap ; sewn in pink and yellow (from p.240) thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting of leather, etc.", 'Support: European wove paper, light brown in color, highly sized and burnished, quite crisp though sturdy.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of table of contents on p.4, consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral motifs in pink, red, yellow, green, etc. on fields of gold, surmounted by scalloped dome or w-shaped piece filled with swirling floral vegetal composition in green, light blue, pink, red, yellow, etc. on a gold ground, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue with gold and red accents, entire piece set in a well of dark pink blended with white ; another brilliant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of text on p.12, consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral motifs in pink, red and yellow on fields of lapis / cobalt and gold, surmounted by scalloped w-shaped piece filled with swirling floral vegetal composition in gold, pink, yellow, red, etc. on a lapis / cobalt ground with gold accents, itself surmounted by elaborate vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue with gold and red accents, entire piece set in a well of red blended with yellow ; written area surrounded by heavy gold frame defined by black fillets with outermost red rule, divisions within (table of contents, poetic passages, etc.) defined by narrow faint gold bands outlined by black fillets ; section headings, key words and passages, etc. rubricated or overlined in red ; simple illuminated tailpiece on p.460 consisting of vegetal designs flanking the close of the text.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; small, compact Turkish hand ; serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, some elongation of horizontal strokes, mainly closed counters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots ; partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 22 V(220), III (226), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "قد تم تسطير هذا الكتاب المستطاب بعون الله وتوفيق الملك الوهاب من النسخة الصحيحة الشريفة المجلية والنفيسة اللطيفة التى استصحبها ملجاء الفحول والفضلاء ومرجع المخارير والعلماء نسخة مشايخ الاسلام وعمدة العلماء الاعلام اعنى به عصمت بك افندى زاده السيد الحاج احمد عارف حكمت بك افندى ادامه الله تعالى بالعز الابدى وكان الباعث تحرير الكتاب ترغيب وتشويق من ذلك الجناب وانا الفقير الى الاء ربه الخالق نجل مشرب زاده على رائق وكان الفراغ من تهزيز براعة [؟] التحرير في اليوم الثالث من صفر الخير لسنه اربع وستين ومائتين والف من هجرة من برى من امام وخلف تم"', 'Explicit: "اقدام وحصين صعب بن معاذ استحلاصنى [استخلاصنى] نصب العين اهتمام ايتديلر"', 'Incipit: "پیشكاه باركاه كبريا ... و تعظيم تحفۀ حمد وسپاس تقديم اولنوب ... حقير قره چلبي زاده عبد العزيز فقير اولدركه اكر چه اول فرمان فرمانى باركاه رسالت ... الفوائح النبويه في السير المصطفويه نام درج الدرده درج وتنظيم اولنوب ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.14.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the work on the Prophet attributed to Karaçelebizade Abdülaziz Efendi (d.1658). Table of contents at opening.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 430', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; decoration, paper, etc. suggest 16th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "524 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on interior of upper cover ; "231" inscribed in pencil on \'title page’ (p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in marbled paper (in red and green) with red leather over spine, fore edge of upper board, and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted European laid paper ; sewn in dark pink thread, four stations ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of leather and paper, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, indistinct) and no chain lines plainly visible, cloudy formation, quite thin though sturdy, burnished ; staining and tide lines ; back flyleaf in European laid paper with "GFA" under eagle watermark.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying the basmalah flanked by floral vegetal accents in gold, yellow, red and white on a field of blue (approaching lapis lazuli), surmounted by larger rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche and surrounding floral vegetal accents in gold, red, and light blue on a field of blue bordered in bands of red and heavy gold interlace, itself surmounted by a scalloped triangular piece or hasp continuing the floral vegetal design ; larger rectangular piece and triangular piece are set in an elaborate well of gold, red, green, and blue bands and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area throughout gold-flecked and surrounded by a gold frame with outer gold and blue rules.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless with characteristic descent of words to baseline and superscripting of final words and letters ; elongation of horizontal strokes ; contrast in thickness of horizontal and vertical strokes.', 'Layout: Written in roughly 9 lines per page, three of ḥadīth text and six of the Persian verse paraphrase with the hemistiches of four lines of verse divided and arranged on the diagonal ; written area divided to set off the ḥadīth text and elucidation ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV-1 (7), I (9), i ; quaternion (anomalous, "missing leaf" possibly pasted to leaf carrying incipit page) followed by single bifolium ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "لا يشبع المؤمن من دون جاره صدق هر که در خطه مسلمانی باشد از نقد دین گر انمایه... اربعینهاى سالکان جامی هست بهر وصول صدر قبول منست از فضل حق عجیب و غریب که بدین اربعین رسی بوصول"', 'Incipit: "صحیح ترین حدیثی که راویان مجالس دین ... این چهل کلمه است ازان کلمات که سهولت فهم و حفظ را بنظم فارسی ترجمه گر ده می آید امید ... لا ؤمن احدكم حتى يحب لاخيه ما يحب لنفسه هر کسی را لقب مکن مؤمن گرچه از سعی جان وتن کاهد ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Jāmī's verse paraphrase of forty ḥadīth."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 64', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.49a (p.103), copied 1142 [1729 or 1730].', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 88. Abu Hanifah\'s Al-Fikh al-akbar." ; on tail-edge in black ink "٣٩٣".', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in dark blue coated and textured paper (embossed with floral vegetal design) and green leather over spine, fore-edge flap and turn-ins (paper faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; upper and lower covers as well as envelope flap carry gold-stamped border ; flyleaves and pastedowns in green wove paper ; interior of fore-edge flap in blue-green silk ; interior of envelope flap in marbled paper (red, lavender, and white) ; sewn in white thread, six stations ; no endbands ; in good condition with only slight abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper, likely three types ; flyleaves in European laid paper with chain lines running horizontally spaced roughly 23 mm. apart and laid lines running vertically spaced roughly 15 laid lines per cm., eagle watermark and lion rampant in shield watermark ; early quires in heavy cream European laid paper with chain lines running horizontally spaced 28-30 mm. apart, laid lines running vertically spaced roughly 10 laid lines per cm., watermarks partially visible ; mid to latter quires in darker, crisp, thin and transluscent European laid paper with chain lines running horizontally spaced 26-28 mm., laid lines running vertically spaced roughly 12 laid lines per cm., watermarks and countermarks partially visible.', 'Decoration: Text enclosed in red rule-border ; text rubricated with section headings, keywords, overlining, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Turkish hand ; strong effect of slant to the left ; mainly serifless but with occasional right-sloping head serif appearing on joined alif, ṭāʼ, etc. ; kāf mashkūlah preferred ; mix of open and closed counters.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled ; many leaves of early quires left at larger dimension to accomodate marginalia, folded rather than trimmed.', 'Collation: iii, 5 V (50), iii ; entirely quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, from second folio, first appears on fol.6 (p.17) with "٥" ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (flyleaves paginated).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب سنة ١١٤٢"', 'Explicit: "يوافق ويثبت على اعتقاد صحيح وعمل صالح من تعلق مشيئته الازلية في الازل بهدايته قول الامام الاعظم رحمة الله عليه يهدى من يشاء الى صراط مستقيم كانه قال فما علينا الا البلاغ المبين والله يهدى من يشاء الى صراط مستقيم اللهم يا هادي المهتدين اهدنا الصراط المستقيم"', 'Incipit: "[al-Fiqh al-akbar] قال اصل التوحيد وما يصح الاعتقاد عليه يجب ان يقول امنت بالله وملائكه وكتبه ورسوله والبعث بعد الموت وبالقدر خيره وشره ... [Sharḥ al-Fiqh al-akbar] الحمد لله الذي هدانا الى طريق اهل السنة والجماعة بفضله العظيم ... فيقول العبد الضعيف المذنب ابو المنتهى عصمه الله تعالى الكبير الكريم عن الخطايا والمعاصي وعن الاعتقاد الفاسدة [كذا] العقيم ان كتاب الفقه الاكبر الذي صنفه الامام الاعظم ابو حنيفه رحمة الله عليه كتاب صحيح مقبول بين اهل السنة والجماعة..."', 'Title supplied by catloguer from inscriptions on fol.1a (p.7).', 'Ms. codex.', '3. fol.49b-50b : [left blank].', '2. fol.6a-fol.49a : [Sharḥ al-Fiqh al-akbar] / Abū al-Muntahá Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad al-Maghnīsāwī.', '1. fol.1a-fol.6a : al-Fiqh al-akbar / Abū Ḥanīfah.', 'Well-annotated copy of the theological treatise attributed to Abū Ḥanifah (d.150/767), followed by a commentary by Abū al-Muntahá Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad al-Maghnīsāwī (d.1000/1592).'])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated; many marginal and interlinear corrections and assorted doodlings in the hand of the copyist.', '[1] consists of at least 7 bābs, missing the beginning and end, and is on timekeeping by solar methods; [2] consists of 15 bābs, missing the beginning and the last page(s) of the khātimah, and is on timekeeping by night using the stars and the characteristics of the Byzantine and Coptic calendars. The item in hand seems to have been used for practice in copying.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 14', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests late 17th or early 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Scrap with writing between pp.246-247.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 95. Fusul mufassal."', 'Binding: Pasteboard(s) covered in dark red brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, now lost) ; board linings in yellow-tinted laid paper ; upper cover bears blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (compare Déroche class. OSd) along with tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in light yellow and cream, intact ; overall in quite poor condition with lower cover and flap entirely lost, some abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, loss of flap, delamination of boards, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper mainly with 11 laid lines per cm. (horzontal), chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart (vertical), and grapes with bar above (carrying initials) watermark ; another type of European laid paper with 12-13 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart (horizontal) and coat of arms watermark with cross flanked by lions above two circles also appears ; well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, though at times somewhat unsteady, Turkish hand ; partially serifed with right-sloping head serifs appearing irregularly on joined alif, lām of definite article, etc. ; effect of tilt to the left ; pointing mainly in distinct dots ; rounded and freely ligatured ; adheres fairly closely to horizontal though occasional superscripting or very slight effect of words descending to baseline.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V-2+IV (16), 14 V(156), IV (164), 27 V(434) ; chiefly quinions ; quaternion carrying table of contents inserted in opening anomalous quinion ; p.461 left partially blank ; p.462 and final three leaves left blank ; lacks proper catchwords though last word of final line on the verso of each leaf is usually repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages each between pp.125-126, pp.315-316, pp.825-826 and pp.827-828 ; repeats p.691 and p.720 twice).', 'Explicit: "آمين يا آله العالمين ويا خير الناصرين برحمتك يا ارحم الراحمين"', 'Incipit: "البحر مداد الكلمات ربي لنفد البحر الآية ولكن ما لا يدركه كله لا يتركه كله تمت فصل في فضائل الفاتحة عن رسول الله صلى الله تعالى عليه وسلم انه قال لابي بن كعب الا اخبرك بسورة لم تنزل في التورية والانجيل والزبور والقرآن مثلها"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy (perhaps an odd first volume) of assorted excerpts from a commentary on the Qurʼān by Naṣīr al-Dīn Nabī ibn Mursil al-Tūqātī. Lacks introductory matter ; opens in Faḍāʼil Sūrat al-Fātiḥah.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 994', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest transcription in Egypt, perhaps first decade of the 20th century. Eventually bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 143', 'Binding: Boards covered in black textured cloth ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a geometric pattern (resembling a scale pattern) in olive green or dull gold ; cover gold-stamped with "الفصول في الاصول" ; gatherings trimmed with sewn in cream thread over two recessed cords ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Machine laid paper (ruled / lined, see p.41 to close) and wove paper (see p.1-40), all with watermark of "GOUVERNEMENT EGYPTIEN" with star and crescent at center and other smaller crescents with three stars (see pp.2, 4, 6, 8, etc. and compare Walz, "The Paper trade of Egypt and the Sudan," p.91).', 'Decoration: Text executed entirely in red ink.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a bold line ; serifless and freely ligatured with effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 14-19 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 9 II (36), i ; exclusively binions ; pages between sections (each corresponding to one of the gatherings) left fully or partially blank (to serve as title pages, corresponding to the recto of the opening leaf of each gathering, see pp.1, 9, 17, 25, 33, 41, 49, 57, 65) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "الغين ذهول عن الشهود مع صحة الاعتقاد والله الموفق للخير والسداد وهو ولي الهداية والارشاد تم"', 'Incipit: "الفصول في الاصول الفصل الأول فهرست الفصل الأول الألف الاتحاد الاتصال الاحد ... الفصل الاول الالف يشار بها الى الذات الاحدية اي الحق من حيث هو اول الاشياء في ازل الآزال ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of the shorter version of the concise work on Ṣūfī terms, etc. by ʻAbd al-Razzāq al-Qāshānī (al-Kāshānī, al-Kāshī, d. between 1329–35).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 347', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, style of painting, etc. may suggest late 16th or early 17th century ; dated ownership statement provides terminus ante quem of 1195 [1780 or 81].', 'Former shelfmark: "468 T. D. M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" and "222" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, now lost [traces of flap on upper board lining, front flyleaf and opening leaf, damage at fore edge of lower cover]) ; board linings in orange paper ; upper and lower covers carry gold-tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations, sewing failing with most gatherings loose ; overall in somewhat poor condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, upper cover detaching, flap lost, etc. ; reinforcements at sewing stations ; ill-fitting (slightly small) and likely not original.', 'Support: non-European laid paper, possibly of more than one type ; 7-9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), curving, quite faint and indistinct in many leaves ; rare single chain lines occasionally visible as short lengths ; sturdy and burnished ; flyleaves in well-burnished European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 25-27 mm. apart (vertical), and watermarks of "VG" and "F" set among three stylized hats [?].', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with large, empty gold cartouche with flanking domes and swirling floral vegetal motifs in gold, white, orange, red, and blue on grounds of gold and blue, bordered in bands of gold, orange and blue ; written area of incipit page surrounded by frame of heavy red and turquoise [?] bands (here and throughout divisions within defined by black fillets), elsewhere written area surrounded by a faint gold frame with outermost turquoise rule ; keywords, section headings and illustration captions rubricated ; generously illustrated with 8 full-page and 12 half-page paintings in gold, red, turquoise, blue, lavender, yellow, dark green, etc. depicting in Mecca and vicinity: al-Masjid al-Ḥarām (p.38), al-masʻá between al-Ṣafāʼ and al-Marwah (p.41), Jabal Bū Qubays marked "محل شق القمر" (p.43), Sūq al-Layl with the birthplace of the Prophet, ʻAlī and speaking stones (p.44), Mudʻá or sūq al-mudʻá, here marked "مدعا" (p.45), Maʻlā with tombs (most prominently of Khadījah) and pools for the Egyptian and Syrian caravans (p.50), Shubaykah cemetery (p.51), Jabal Nūr with Ghār Ḥirāʼ (p.53), Jabal Thawr with Ghār Hijrat (p.54), ʻArafāt with pilgrim tents, banners and lampstands, Maṭbakh Ādam, Masjid Namīrah, four posts marking the place of the standing ritual, and Syrian, Egyptian and Yemeni maḥāmil (p.61), Muzdalifah (p.64), Minā with the jamarāt, place of the sacrifice, Masjid Khayf, cave where the Prophet was sheltered (غار والمرسلات), etc. (p.68) ; in Medina and vicinity: Jabal Mafraḥ (p.80), the Prophet\'s mosque / al-Masjid al-Nabawī (p.83), al-Baqīʻ cemetery (p.87), Masjid Qubā (p.88), Four mosques and the two-qiblah Mosque (p.90), Jabal Uḥud (p.91) and in Jerusalem: al-Ḥaram al-Sharīf (p.93) with al-Masjid al-Aqṣá, Qubbat al-Ṣakhrah, etc. and a sandal of the Prophet (p.94).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, written area divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 5 IV(40), IV-1 (47), i ; exclusively quaternions (final anomalous) ; on pp.74-75 written area framed but left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "صل علی روضۀ خیر الانام خاتمه نسخه برین شد تمام تم تم تم تم تم تم تم تم تم"', 'Incipit: "اى همه کس را بدرت التجا کعبۀ دل را ز تو نور و صفا ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant, richly illustrated copy of Muḥyī al-Dīn Lārī's renowned poetical description of the holy cities Mecca and Medina with a full account of the rites of pilgrimage (ḥajj)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1007', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.303, copied by ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Ibrāhīm ʻAbd Allāh al-Shaybīnī with transcription completed 7 Ramaḍān 1266 [ca. 17 July 1850].', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 156', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark blue textured cloth with dark blue leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "حاشية الجمل على الهمزية" ; sewn in white thread over three recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands ; overall in good condition.', 'Support: European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (horizontal), three crescents / tre lune watermark (with faces / human profile, roughly 85 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see pp.4, 14, 210, etc.), and countermark "L A N [?]" (see pp.16, 26, 52, 218, 286, 292, etc.), quite sturdy, cream in color, lightly burnished ; minor ink burn in some gatherings, minor staining, roughly trimmed.', 'Decoration: Keywords and headings rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, somewhat stiff, angular Egyptian hand in a medium to bold line ; mainly serifless with marked tilt to the left, flattened descenders, pointing in distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 15 V(150), I+1 (153), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمت هذه الحاشية الشريفة بحمد الله وعونه ومنته وكان الفراغ من نسخها يوم الثلاث المبارك سبعة ايام خلت من شهر رمضان المبارك الذي هو من سنة ١٢٦٦ ستة وستين ومائتين بعد الالف من هجرة من خلقه الله على اكمل وصف على يد كاتبه الفقير الى الله تعالى عبد الحمن بن ابراهيم عبد الله الشيبيني غفر الله له ولوالديه ولمن نظر فيه ودعا له بالمغفرة امين تم"', 'Explicit: "جعلنا الله ممن حقق له حقائق قربه وامداده واسعافه وامنا من كل فتنة ومحنة انه الجواد الكريم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي فضل سيدنا محمد صلى الله عليه وسلم على سائر الانبياء والمرسلين واختصه بشمائل ومعجزات ... اما بعد فمما يتعين على مكلف ان يعتقد ان كمالات نبينا صلى الله عليه وسلم لا تحصى واحواله وصفاته وشمائله لا تستقصى ... ومن ابلغ ما مدح به صلى الله عليه وسلم من النظم الرائق البديع ... ما صاغه صوغ التبر احمر ... الشيخ شرف الدين ابو عبد الله محمد بن سعيد البوصيري من قصيدته الهمزية ... وقد شرحت شروحا كثيرة ... وسميتها الفتوحات الاحمدية بالمنح المحمدية ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.3.', 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy of the commentary by al-Shaykh Sulaymān ibn ʻUmar al-Jamal (d.1790) on al-Būṣīrī's (d.1296?) poem in praise of the Prophet entitled al-Qaṣīdah al-hamzīyah fī madḥ al-nabawīyah."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 350', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on pp.346-347, copied by one Riz̤ā with transcription completed 24 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1156 [ca. 8 February 1744] apparently on the order of Navvāb (Nawāb) Shīr Jang Bahādur in Shāhjahānābād (Delhi).', 'Former shelfmark: "365 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "١٤١" on tail edge of text block.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; doublures also in dark red leather painted in shades of blue and gold to define central mandorla, pendants and cornerpieces overlaid with elegant swirling vegetal decoration (stamped or appliqué design) ; hinges also in dark red leather, interior of spine in woven textile ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold-painted mandorla, pendants and cornerpieces (each filled with vegetal compositions) as well as gold-painted and tooled borders, outermost on a blue-painted feild ; sewn in white thread, four stations plus primaries, somewhat loose but sound ; worked endbands in white, blue and a dark metallic thread ; overall in fairly good condition with some abrasion, minor pest damage, some gatherings loose, etc. ; subtle repair to replace lost pigment in border on upper cover.', 'Support: Framing written area, a non-European (likely Indian) laid paper with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical, distinct, curving) and no chain lines plainly visible, dense and sturdy, well-burnished, tinted blue in color and silver-flecked ; small rectangle of written area in another likely Indian laid paper, faintly marbled in pink (reminiscent of kumlu / kılçıklı ebru) and gold-flecked ; endpapers in still another paper (likely also of Indian manufacture), well-burnished, gray in tone ; subtle repairs in blue paper.', 'Decoration: Fine illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of table of contents (فهرست) on p.4 and at opening of text on p.10, the latter consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying basmalah surmounted by w-shaped piece / scalloped dome filled with swirling floral vegetal decoration in orange, blue, bright pistachio green, pink, white, and lavender on grounds of blue and gold, all set in a well of pink bands with lavender crosses and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; splendid illuminated marginal decoration (in floral and vegetal forms) completes illuminated double-page opening on pp.10-11 ; simpler headpieces (in the form of gold rectangular pieces) appear at headings of other sections throughout ; written area throughout surrounded by gold frame with outermost white rule ; margins and columns within also defined by gold bands outlined in black ; keywords rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; large, elegant Indian hand in a medium to heavy line ; characteristically serifless with gentle effect of words descending to baseline, superscripting of letters, elongation and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in distinct dots, occasionally set very close together or conjoined, dramatically sweeping shaqq or sarkash on many kāfs, point of final nūn set just down in wide, slightly angled bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 7 lines per page with written area divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, II (4), 15 IV(124), II (128), IV (136), IV+2 (146), 2 IV(162), IV-1 (169), III-1 (174), ii ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "حرره العبد المذنب العاصی یحتاج الی رحمة الله الملک الاعلی رضا بتاریخ بیست و چهارم شهر ذی الحجه روزسه شنبه سنه ١١۵۶ هجری سمت اتمام پذیرفت این مجموعۀ جهان آرا مسمی بگنج المعانی که نواب شیر جنگ بهادر دام اقباله در سلک انتخاب کشیده و بندۀ درگاه بموجب امر اشرف در دار الخلافۀ شاهجهان آباد در عین بی سرانجافی ..."', 'Incipit: "سر دفتر ستایش حمد خدا تویی بسم الله صحیفۀ هر مدعا تویی ..."', 'Title from closing matter on p.347.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of a selection of Persian poetry with contents listing ("فهرست این نسخه اشعار منتخبات خاص") provided prior to opening of text (see pp.4-8). Contributions to the cataloguing from Elizabeth Kunze.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Three crescents. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Contains astronomical tables and diagrams and a map of the northern hemisphere from Spain to China enhanced with blue sand.', 'In Maghribī script.', 'Text rubricated, with silver flecks and blue sand clinging to red ink ; marginal corrections in hand of copyist (?).', 'Date in colophon: wa-wāfaqat nihāyatuhu yawm al-sabt min awākhir shahr Jumādá al-ūlá min ʻām thamāniyah wa-tisʻīn wa-miʼatayn wa-alf min al-hijrah al-nabawīyah [ca. April 1881].', "Title from opening matter (author's preface) on p.2.", 'A compendium on theoretical astronomy, apparently an Arabic translation of the Persian, Gayhānʹshinākht by ʻAyn al-Zamān Ḥasan ibn ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad Ibrāhīm ibn Aḥmad Abū ʻAlī Qaṭṭān Marvazī (d. 1153 or 4).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 145', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.230, copied by Aḥmad ibn Khiḍr (Ahmet bin Hızır) in Erzincan. Transcription completed first of Rabīʻ I 1122 [ca. 30 April 1710].', 'Accompanying materials: Pink-tinted folded sheet with notes, etc. (paginated pp.59-60).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 158. Commentary on al-Mughni fi ilm al-nahw."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather (goat?) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; upper and lower covers bear blind-stamped scalloped mandorla filled with symmetrical vegetal design (compare Déroche class. OSd) and accompanied by tooled rosette pendants and accents, as well as border in tooled fillets ; sewn in brown thread, two stations ; traces of worked endbands remain, core exposed ; in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of leather at spine, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types, varying in thickness but all well-sized and burnished, with some tinted (dark yellow) ; opening quires in a European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 25 mm. apart (horizontal) ; latter quires in a European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark with crown above bar (with initials) above pendant (resembling beads or grapes).', 'Decoration: Keywords and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; bold Eastern Anatolian hand ; virtually serifless though occasional head-serifs appear on lām, free-standing alif, etc. ; pointed in the form of a curved line or inverted caret ; kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred with bar (shaqq) elongated.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 10 V(100), V+1 (111), II+1 (116), i ; chiefly quinions ; final two leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes back flyleaf and insert).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "قد تمت هذه النسخة الشريفة على يد اضعف العباد واحقر الطلاب اذا حضر له يعرف واذا غاب لم يذكر احمد بن خضر غفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه في تاريخ سنة اثنى وعشرون ومائة والف في اول شهر ربيع الاول في يوم الاثنين في وقت الضحى في بلد ارزنجان في مدرسة كرككرك تمت تمت تمت تمت"', 'Explicit: "قال السيد في شرح الكبير للكافية قوله وهو قليل اي والتنوين الغالي في كلام الفصحاء قليل والله اعلم بالصواب تمت الكتاب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الفاطر الحكيم القادر العليم ... فقد يقول العبد الضعيف ... محمد بن عبد الرحيم بن محمد العمري الميلان لما لم يكن للكتاب المسمى بالمغني في علم النحو شرح وهو من مصنفات استاذنا العلامة ... فخر الملة والدين احمد بن الحسين الجاپردي ... فقد خطر بالي ان اشرح له شرحا"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Clear copy of the commentary on al-Mughnī fī ʻilm al-naḥw, a treatise on grammar by the author's teacher, Fakhr al-Dīn al-Jārbardī (d.1345)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 277', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; decoration, etc. would suggest 17th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "108 T. D. M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis] on reverse of opening mounted leaf.', 'Binding: Heavy pasteboards covered in dark blue leather ; accordion / concertina format ; board linings in green coated paper embossed with scroll / interlace pattern ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition, compare Déroche NSd 7) with tooled and gold-painted border ; sturdy leaves hinged together with green silk ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion (vegetal design in mandorla only partially visible), staining, lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; housed in sturdy slipcase covered in same dark blue leather with tooled and gold-painted borders and rosette accents, lined with yellow paper ; likely not original binding.', 'Support: Written area in non-European (likely Persian) laid paper, well-burnished ; borders gold-flecked and tinted golden yellow with a slight pink hue ; written area of two leaves mounted on European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by red pendants and set off by swirling floral vegetal decoration in gold, white, red, etc. on a bright blue (reminiscent of lapis) ground, surmounted by a scalloped dome / triangular piece or hasp set in rectangular piece all filled with similar floral vegetal decoration on fields of gold and blue with turquoise, black and light blue accents, entire piece surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) and bordered in bands of gold and blue ; written area gold-flecked and surrounded by rich border consisting of gold, white, blue, and turquoise bands flanking a heavy band of light blue with vegetal decoration in gold ; floral vegetal motifs set off opposite corners of written area ; margins heavily gold-flecked ; elegant illuminated tailpiece at close consisting of upper and lower rectangular pieces with empty gold cartouches (one rosette or mandorla-shaped, the other a scalloped lozenge) surrounded by floral vegetal designs in gold, white, blue and red on fields of blue with turquoise and gold accents surrounded by bands of gold, red, blue and heavy black and gold interlace.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; compact, elegant hand in a medium line (fine specimen of calligraphy) ; serifless with characteristic descent of words to baseline and superscripting of final words and letters as well as elongation of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 8 lines per page on the diagonal, a hemistich per line ; frame-ruled.', "Collation: Fourteen leaves or 'panels' hinged together with green silk in accordion format ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.", 'Explicit: "هر طرف كان سوخ راند جامي بيصبر و دل از پيش افغان كنان چون دادخواهي بگذرد"', 'Incipit: "از خارخار عشق تو در سینه دارم خارها هر دم شکفته بر رخم زان خارها گلزارها ..."', 'Title from flap of slipcase.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Superb calligraphic specimen in accordion format employing ghazals of Jāmī (d.1492). Contributions to the cataloguing from Ali Rafi and Abdullah Ghouchani.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 432', 'Origin: As appears in colophon, copied by Muḥammad Zakarīyā Samarqandī with transcription completed in the year 1256 [1840 or 41].', 'Former shelfmark: "548 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf ; "233" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\'.', 'Binding: Heavy pasteboards covered in painted lacquerwork, spine in black leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in fine painted lacquerwork of composition evoking book cover design with central mandorla and pendants (filled with flowers and leaves in shades of pink and green on a black ground) set in a red ground with swirling floral vegetal pattern in gold and surrounded by border in black with white dots and flanking gold fillets (composition of upper doublure mirrors that of lower doublure) ; upper and lower covers bear paintings of nearly identical floral composition in mirror image to one another on an orange or bronze background, namely a central cluster of peonies, poppies, etc. with roses, poppies, buds, and other floral forms all in shades of pink and white with leaves in various shades of green, and surrounded by decorative bands with floral motifs in various sizes on bands of red and black ; sewn in pink thread, four stations ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion and losses to lacquerwork and pasteboard, text block almost fully detached from cover, etc. ; cover large for textblock and perhaps not original.', 'Support: Quite heavy wove paper ; surfaced dyed pale blue and pale green.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening consisting of rectangular piece with empty cartouche and flanking vegetal accents (all in gold) set between heavy gold bands and surmounted by a scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) filled with swirling floral vegetal decoration and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) all in gold ; written area (and panels within) surrounded by gold rule-border ; ḥadīth text, preface and closing matter chrysographed.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless with characteristic descent of words to baseline and superscripting of final words and letters ; elongation of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 9 lines per page, three of ḥadīth text and six of the Persian verse paraphrase with the hemistiches of four lines of verse divided and arranged on the diagonal ; written area divided to set off the ḥadīth text and elucidation ; text of preface in 8 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V+I (12) ; quinion with added single bifolium ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "على يد ضعيف الفقير الحقير كتبه العبد المذنب محمد زكرياى سمرقندى غفر الله تعالى ذنوبه ١٢٥۶"', 'Explicit: "لا يشبع المؤمن من دون جاره صدق النبي هر که در خطه مسلمانی باشد از نقد دین گر انمایه ... تمت الاربعين حديث مع ترجمه اربعینهاى سالکان جامی هست بهر وصول صدر قبول بنود از فضل حق عجیب و غریب که بدین اربعین رسی بوصول ... ما تازه گناهیم و عطای تو قدیم است"', 'Incipit: "صحیح ترین حدیثی که راویان مجالس دین ... اما بعد این چهل حدیث کلمه است ازان کلمات که سهولت فهم و حفظ را بنظم فارسی ترجمه گر ده مي آید امید ... لا يؤمن احدكم حتى يحب لاخيه ما يحب لنفسه هر کسی را لقب مکن مؤمن گرچه از سعی جان وتن کاهد ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of Jāmī's verse paraphrase of forty ḥadīth."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 978', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 127', 'Binding: Boards covered in textured black cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "الغائب المفقود للاشارات" ; sewn in heavy white thread, seemingly over two recessed cords (difficult to examine) ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion at spine and board edges.', 'Support: Wove paper.', 'Decoration: Text executed entirely in a pinkish-red ink.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed ; opening leaves in a more carefully executed naskh with elements of ruqʻah.', 'Layout: Written in 10-12 lines per page.', "Collation: i, 3 V(30), V-1 (39), i ; exclusively quinions ; pages between sections (corresponding to gatherings) left blank, with some serving as section 'title pages' (see pp.21, 41, 61) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "قد عرفت اصناف المقدمات في مواضعها النمط الثامن في البهجة والسعادة"', 'Incipit: "النمط الرابع في الوجود وعلله انه قد يغلب على اوهام الناس ان الموجود هو المحسوس وان ما لا يناله الحس بجوهره ففرض وجوده محال ..."', "Title from inscription on opening 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Carefuly copy of a selection of extracts from Ibn Sīnā's (d.1037) al-Ishārāt wa-al-tanbīhāt, opening in al-Namaṭ al-rābiʻ and concluding with al-Namaṭ al-sābiʻ."])

en: (count: ['Contains diagrams.', 'Text rubricated in red and gold; triple borders throughout in red, black, and gold; 1 loose sheet bound in; marginal corrections and commentary in hand of copyist (said inside cover to be author himself); finding aids and other notes in another(?) hand; couplets in Persian on endpapers and first flyfleaf.', 'Date and provenance in colophon: qad tamma wa-kamala taʾlīf hādhihi al-nuskhah al-sharīfah fī Qusṭanṭīnīyah fī dār al-ḥadīth li-Ḥusayn Pāshā ... yawm al-aḥad al-thāmin wa-al-ʻishrīn min shahr Rabīʻ al-ākhir min shuhūr sanat sitt wa-ʻishrīn wa-miʾah wa-alf min al-hijrah al-nabawīyah wa-qad badaʾa ...[?]... al-musammá bi-al-turkīyah Qazalṭāgh[?] fī shahr Rajab al-mubārak min shuhūr sanat khams wa-ʻishrīn wa-miʾah wa-alf [July-August 1713].', 'Commentary on Bahjat al-albāb fī ʻilm al-asṭurlāb, "a treatise on the use of the astrolabe in 18 bābs" by ʻAbd al-Ḥalīm al-Qayṣarī Suwaylim Zādah. David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), pp. 165 and 174. On p. [59] is a discussion in a different hand of the origin of the word "astrolabe."'])

en: (count: ['Gift of Stephen Spaulding.', 'Colophon states that the copy was made by Ghulām Ghawth in the city of ʻAzīmābād (also known as Patna, capital of the Bihar province of India) in the year one of an unidentifiable Mughul ruler\'s reign. Although no name is provided for this ruler, an epithet is present, which contains the word "khalīfah"; since only Akbar, Jahangīr, and Shāh Jahan referred to themselves as khalīfahs, it is likely that the text is referring to one of these three emperors. If so, the date of production would be either 1556, 1605, or 1627, which are the dates of the accessions of each of these three kings.', 'First page of manuscript contains a note in English written by one owner, which reads: "I bought this at the sale of General Carnac\'s Books: it is the copy which the general lent to Sir WIlliam Jones when employed in compiling his Persian Grammar. A very correct copy." There is also a printed note pasted onto this page with the same information. Seventh page features the title of the work and table of contents hand-written in Latin.', 'Written in black nastaʻlīq script. Rubricated. Text is bordered with thin blue and red lines.', 'Reddish-brown soft leather bound codex with simple tooling on upper and lower covers. Binding may not be original; some folios of different paper seem to have been added at the front and back, which have been left blank.', "Written in 656/1258, the Gulistān is Saʻdī's most famous work, composed in rhymed prose with many verses interspersed throughout. The work, which is usually divided into eight sections, constists of entertaining anecdotes that illustrate ethical points."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 895', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.298, copied by Muḥammad Jaʻfar ibn Muḥammad Ādam in Chīnāpatan (چيناپتن, i.e. Madras or Chennai) with transcription completed in 1184 [1770 or 71] or 1185 [1771 or 2] ; likely 1185 as numerals appear to have been overwritten in red by the rubricator.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip or tag with "#2" in red pencil (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Slip of ruled paper with inscription in ink "Chambers. See Ethé, Bodleian cat., col. 260." (paginated pp.3-4) -- c. Slip with description in hand of G. Meredith-Owens "MO 15 Gulistān of Saʻdī | copied in 1185 (6 ?) in Chināpatan (?) by Muḥammad b. Jaʻfar b. Muḥammad" (paginated pp.5-6) -- d. Slip with description (in hand of E. Husselman ?) "Muṣliḥ ibn ʻAbd Allāh, Musharrif al-Dīn, called Saʻdī, Shīrāzī. Gulistān. Copied A.H. 1185. Have several other MSS in U. of M. Isl. MSS." (paginated pp.7-8) -- e. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Husselman and Meredith-Owen notes" (paginated pp.9-10) -- f. Slip with note "Counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" (paginated pp.11-12) -- g. Card with description in pencil "Gulestān (MS) | Saʻdi | Date: 1185 AH (1766±) | Pages: 284" (paginated pp.13-14).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no 44', 'Binding: Boards covered in reddish cloth with red-brown leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in faintly marbled paper with a pinkish hue ; head edge of text block gilt ; spine blind-tooled with leaf and decorative lines as well as gold-stamped with "SAʻDĪ |GULISTĀN | MS. | A.H. 1185" ; sewn in white thread over five recessed cords ; overall in good condition.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with roughly 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly indistinct, curving) and chain lines only faintly visible at roughly 25 mm. apart (see p.302, etc.), thin and crisp though sturdy, well-sized and burnished, stark white in color ; original leaves have been mounted in frames of wove paper (applied to the recto) which have then been sewn in the current rebinding ; outer edges of original leaves and mounts have been trimmed together ; minor pest damage in original leaves.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.22 consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche (carrying the basmalah set off by cloud bands) flanked by floral vegetal motifs in gold, red and dark grey blue, surmounted by scalloped w-shaped piece with swirling floral vegetal designs in red, grey blue [or dark green?], and gold on fields of gold and grey blue, all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) grey blue and set in a well of gold and grey bands with red vegetal accents ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by frame consisting of a gold band defined by black fillets with outermost black and red rules ; elsewhere written area surrounded by triple rule-border in two red rules and one blue ; keywords, abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke overlining some keywords), and vocalization rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of horizontal stroke with closed loop, three dots, etc.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant, somewhat compact hand in a medium line ; serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, many closed counters, pointing (two and three dots) mainly in strokes or conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Written in 12 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iv, 17 IV(136), II+1 (141), iv ; almost exclusively quaternions (though original sewing now impossible to discern, mid-quire marks designate centers of gatherings) ; middle of the quire marks in the form of black oblique strokes in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf ; final leaves ruled but left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in now light grey ink, Western numerals (every other leaf, not always visible) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "این کتاب مستطاب کلستان از معین واهب متعال ... بشب دوشنبه در سنه ۱۱۸۴ [۱۱۸۵] چیناپتن باتمام رسید کاتب الحروف محمد جعفر بن محمد ادم غفر الله ذنوبهى بیت ... تم"', 'Incipit: "منت مر خدا یرا عز و جل که طاعتش موجب قربت است ..."', 'Title from close on p.298.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Gulistān, celebrated collection of moralizing anecdotes in rhymed prose interspersed with verse (maqāmah form), composed in 1258 by the renowned Persian poet and prose writer, Saʻdī (d.1292).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 307', 'Origin: As appears at close on p.298-299, copy executed for Iʻtimād al-Dawlah Mīrzā Āqā Khān Khwājah-ʼi Nūrī Ṣadr-i Aʻẓam (اعتماد الدوله ... میرزا آقا خان خواجۀ نوری صدر اعظم) by Muḥammad Ḥusayn al-Shīrāzī with transcription completed in Shawwāl 1271 [June-July 1855] (most likely reading). Numeral ٢ now appears as ١ though with evidence that some pigment has been lost.', 'Former shelfmark: "206 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on upper board lining ; "١٦" on \'title page\' (p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark gray leather (pebbled quality of shagreen) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; two-piece binding (overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; board linings in pink surface-dyed paper with stag leaping above pond (stag springing or salient, or even courant) watermark (see lower board lining) ; upper and lower covers carry gold-painted scalloped rectangular panel and frame ; sewn in light pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and dark magenta, good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with some abrasion and staining, negative draw in upper cover, etc.', 'Support: Wove paper, dark cream to beige in color, well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with basmalah flanked by gold cartouches and surmounted by elongated w-shaped piece filled with delicate floral vegetal decoration in shades of pink, blue, green, red, and orange on grounds of dark blue and gold set in a well of gold, dark blue, bright green and red bands ; brilliant illuminated marginal decoration (of floral motifs, saz leaves, etc. chiefly in gold with red, blue, orange, and black accents) completes the illuminated double-page opening (p.2-3) ; gold cloud-bands set off text on incipit and facing page ; written area gold-flecked and surrounded by frame in bands of gold, light blue, red, and turquoise with outermost blue rule, divisions within defined by narrow gold bands ; margin defined by red fillet flanked by black fillets ; keywords and some headings rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; large, elegant hand in a medium line ; characteristically serifless, with gentle effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots, point of final nūn set just down in wide, angled bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 12 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off verses ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV-1 (7), 19 II (83), IV-2 (89), 14 II (145), II+1 (150), i ; almost exclusively binions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads " ... و هم خط تحریر شان را بیاراید برای تعلیم طرز کتاب و هر مشق خط ناپسند این بنده جانی محمد حسین الشیرازی ... حرره فی شهر شوال سنه ١٢٧١"', 'Explicit: "تمام شد کتاب گلستان بتوفیق حضرت سبحان و هو المستعان و علیه التکلان بدانکه درین کتاب چنانکه رسم مؤلفانست و داب مصنفان از اشعار متقدمان بطریق استعارات تلفیقی نرفت ... بر رسولان بلاغ باشد و بس"', 'Incipit: "منت خدای را عز و جل که طاعتش موجب قربتست ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1) and closing matter on p.296.", 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Gulistān, celebrated collection of moralizing anecdotes in rhymed prose interspersed with verse (maqāmah form), composed in 1258 by the renowned Persian poet and prose writer, Saʻdī (d.1292). Contributions to the cataloguing from Elizabeth Kunze.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 502', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. may suggest late 17th or early 18th century. Seal impression on 'title page' provides only approximate terminus ante quem of 1739 ; ownership statement on 'title page' provides terminus ante quem of 1753.", 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 98" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition having vertical and horizontal symmetry, similar to Déroche class. OSd 8) and pendants along with tooled rosette accents and border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in dark blue and cream [?], only headband intact ; overall in good condition with minor abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, curved) and chain lines rarely visible ; well-burnished, beige in color, thin and transluscent though quite sturdy ; flyleaves in European laid paper (outer green surface-dyed) with "[La] Stella" and "[G e ] C. Cini" (compare paper of A43. MS. Shelley c. 7 dated 1821-22 in Barker-Benfield, Shelleyan writing materials in the Bodleian Library, pp.53-54).', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.6 consisting of a rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by swirling floral vegetal decoration in white, lavender, and gold on fields of blue and green, surmounted by a scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) with floral vegetal motifs in blue, dark pink, white, lavender, green, and black on a gold ground itself surmounted by undulating vegetal motifs resembling leaves and even feathers in gold, green and blue ; keywords rubricated ; text of written area surrounded by frame consisting of gold band with black fillets and outermost blue fillet ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant and compact Egyptian or Turkish [?] hand ; extensively seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on most ascender letters (even free-standing alif), slight effect of tilt to the left, mainly closed counters, freely ligatured, curvilinear descenders (some sweeping), pointing in distinct dots, partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 9 V(90), I+1 (93), ii ; almost exclusively quinions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of an oblique stroke in the lower outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Explicit: "والمعقبات فى قوله تعالى له معقبات من بين يديه ومن خلفه اتنهى ذلك والله تم الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله جاعل الملائكة رسلا اولى اجنحة مثنى وثلاث ورباع ... فهذا تأليف لطيف جمعته في اخبار الملائكة الابرار ... وسميته الحبائك في اخبار الملائك ..."', 'Title from opening on p.6.', 'Ms. codex.', '2. p.188-p.189 : Rafʻ al-ṣawt bi-dhabḥ al-mawt / Abū al-Faḍl ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Abī Bakr Jalāl al-Dīn al-Suyūṭī.', '1. p.6-p.187 : al-Ḥabāʼik fī akhbār al-malāʼik / Abū al-Faḍl ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Abī Bakr Jalāl al-Dīn al-Suyūṭī.', "Elegant copy of al-Suyūṭī's (d.1505) compilation of ḥadīth on angels followed by another very brief treatise of his entitled Rafʻ al-ṣawt bi-dhabḥ al-mawt. Contributions to the cataloguing from Ali Rafi."])

en: (count: ["Copy dated 26, Shaʻbān, 1025 / September 8, 1616. Scribe's name is not mentioned, but hand is identical to the second volume of this work, also in this collection, (Isl. Ms. 668) in which the scribe's name is mentioned in the colophon: Yūsuf [ibn] Yaʻqūb.", 'ʻUnwān in gold, blue, and red; black-ruled gold margins. Text written in nastaʻlīq shekasteh script in black with rubrications. Hand is identical ato that in Vol. 2.', 'Simple leather bound codex; decaying rapidly. Leather is disintegrating and folios are crumbling and falling away from the binding.', 'Ḥabīb-i siyar was usually copied in three volumes. This collection contains only Volumes 1 and 2, (Isl. Ms. 667 and Isl Ms. 668, respectively.) Contents of these two volumes correspond to those of British Museum Cat. Per Mss. for Volumes 1 and 2 of this work. This is manuscript is Volume 1. (For Volume 2, see Ḥabīb-i siyar, jild al-thānī: Isl. Ms. 668).', "This is the first of three volumes which comprise Khvandemīr's well known and important general history, completed in 929/1523, which spans the creation of the world up to the death of Shah Ismāʻīl Safavī I. The work includes particularly detailed information about Herat under Sultan Husayn Bayqara, the last Timurid ruler in Herat, as well as Shah Ismāʻīl and Bābur's life. This work has been published in both Persian and English editions."])

en: (count: ["Copy dated 8 Rabīʻ al-Awwal, 1026 / March 16, 1617. Scribe's name is mentioned in the colophon: Yūsuf [ibn] Yaʻqūb.", 'ʻUnwān in gold, blue, green, and red; black-ruled gold margins. Text written in nastaʻlīq shekasteh script in black with rubrications. Hand is identical to that in Vol. 1. Last few pages contain notes in a different hand, in nastaʻlīq script.', 'Simple leather bound codex with some tooling on upper and lower covers as well as envelop flaps; decaying rapidly. Leather is disintegrating and folios are crumbling and falling away from the binding.', 'Ḥabīb-i siyar was usually copied in three volumes. This collection contains only Volumes 1 and 2, (Isl. Ms. 667 and Isl Ms. 668, respectively.) Contents of these two volumes correspond to those of British Museum Cat. Per Mss. for Volumes 1 and 2 of this work. This is manuscript is Volume 2. (For Volume 1, see Ḥabīb-i siyar, jild al-awwal: Isl. Ms. 667).', "This is the second of three volumes which comprise Khvandemīr's well known and important general history, completed in 929/1523, which spans the creation of the world up to the death of Shah Ismāʻīl Safavī I. The work includes particularly detailed information about Herat under Sultan Husayn Bayqara, the last Timurid ruler in Herat, as well as Shah Ismāʻīl and Bābur's life. This work has been published in both Persian and English editions."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 881', 'Origin: As appears in scribal colophon on p.586, transcription completed 3 Jumādá I 1274 [ca. 20 December 1857]. As appears in preceding authorial colophon (also on p.586), composition completed in Shīrāz on ʻĪd al-Ghadīr 18 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1242 [ca. 13 July 1827].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Scrap with title in ink "Hadīqat as-Siyāḥat" (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Recycled card with notes in handwriting of Emilie Savage-Smith [?] "Geog. dict. | colophon gives date | rubrication becomes more & more purple the more recent the MS." (paginated pp.3-4) -- c. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne? No Husselman or Meredith-Owens notes" (paginated pp.5-6).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 30', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in tan leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings and hinges in a teal wove paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition) and pendants as well as border in blind rules ; small label on spine carries inscription in French "Dict Géographique Persan" ; sewn in dark pink and lime green thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, fairly good condition (tab extends from spine leather) ; overall in somewhat poor condition with lower cover fully detached, some abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of spine leather, etc.', 'Support: Wove paper ; highly sized and burnished to glossy, dark cream in color.', 'Decoration: Keywords and headings rubricated ; overlining in red ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas, hāʼ, etc. in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; compact, elegant hand ; serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline, some elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing (two and three dots) in distinct or conjoined dots ; passages in Arabic (Qurʼānic excerpts, etc.) in a fine Persianate naskh.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 24 IV(192), IV+1 (201), IV-2 (207), 10 IV(287), i ; exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and fyleaves and skips ahead four pages following p.15 with p.20).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," triangular, in Arabic, reads "قد فرغ من تاليف هذا الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب المسمى بحدايق السياحة فى بلدة الشيراز فى يوم السبت ثمان وعشر من شهر ذيحجة الحرام اعنى فى عيد الغدير سنة اثنتين واربعين ومائتين بعد الالف من الهجرة النبوية عليه الف الف الصلوات والتحية" ; "Scribal," triangular, reads "قد كان الفراغ من استنساخه فى يويوم [يوم] الاحد ثلث من شهر جمادى الاول سنة اربع وسبعين ومائتين بعد الالف من الهجرة النبوية صلى الله عليه واله خير البريه تمت اتمام شد ..."', 'Explicit: "با کمال لطف عالم گیر یاد"', 'Incipit: "حدایق حمد و ثنا و ریاض سپاس بیمنتها مختص واجب الوجودی است ... اما بعد بر ر ای معرفت مد اثر ... الفقیر الحقیر الجانی بن اسکندر زین العابدین الشیروانى احسن الله الیه وغفر الله لوالدیه ... چون این مجموعه از ریاحین الطاف لطایف ... موسوم بحدایق السیاحة کردید و ذکر دیار و امصار را بترتیب حروف ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.13 and colophon on p.586.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of a work by Zayn al-ʻĀbidīn al-Shīrvānī (d.1837) relating his extensive travels and Ṣūfic thought, completed in Shīrāz in 1827 before his departure on a final pilgrimage to Mecca, after completion of his Riyāz̤ al-siyāḥah (composed 1237/1821-2) and before completion of his Bustān al-siyāḥah (composed 1248/1833).'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Andrea Galvani of Pordenone. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 35 and no. 860.', 'Contains short mathematical tables.', 'Text rubricated; marginal notes and corrections in hand of copyist and others.', 'Date and name of owner/copyist in colophon: ʻalá yad al-faqīr Aḥmad Kharās ...[?]... Rajab sanat 1291 [August-September 1874].', 'For an earlier copy of this text see Mich. Isl. Ms. 801,3.', 'al-Qalaṣādī (Carthage, 1988).', 'Text (not this copy) published.', '"An abridgement of the author\'s Kashf al-jilbāb ʻan ʻilm al-ḥisāb, in an introduction, four parts, and a conclusion.... Each part contains 8 chapters. This copy is defective; part 2, chapter 1 (end) to part 3, chapter 1 (beginning) is wanting (between ff. 11 and 12)." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ["Ibn al-ʻArabī's text in red, commentary by author in black; extensive marginal commentaries in hand of copyist.", 'Pp. [1-206]. Bound with: ʻAbd al-Ghanī ibn Ismāʻīl, Hādhā sharḥ amṭarathu al-samawāt al-hamá ... lil-risālah ... allatī qadhaf bihā ... sayyidī al-shaykh Arslān al-mansūb bi-Dimishq al-Shām, pp. [210-323].', 'Commentary on Ibn al-ʻArabī\'s Kitāb al-asfār, on "the 3 journeys, to, from and in God." Encyc. Islam, v. iii, p. 707b.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Andrea Galvani of Pordenone, name spelled out in roman. Cf. Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 35 and no. 860.', 'Contains rough geometrical diagrams.', 'Egypt, where it remained unfinished for a long while until its completion was facilitated."', 'Text not rubricated, has overlinings in black; marginal corrections in hand of copyist; each kurrāsah numbered with notation: ʻAṭṭār/Ashkāl/K. [X]; colophon describes author\'s travels in compiling this work: "I compiled it during many travels, without stopping at what had already been written. I began to compose it in Cairo, Egypt, then traveled to Constantinople where I compiled some more, then I moved to Alexandria ...[?]... where I compiled even more. It was not completed until I returned to', "Date of 19th cent. based on author's death date.", '"A short treatise on the commentary on the Ashkāl al-taʼsīs of Samarḳandī by Mūsá ibn Maḥmūd al-Rūmī Ḳāḍīzāda." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 921', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974). Copy likely made from the lithograph edition by Aḥmad al-Shīrāzī (Tehran 1329/1911).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 70', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "ملك [كذا] | الافهام | ابن جمهور | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper of at least two types (one cream in color, one beige in color).', 'Decoration: Occasional overlining ; passage on p.69 supplied in contrasting lavender ink.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a medium to bold line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of inclination to the right, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 27-28 lines per page.', 'Collation: Pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "والجمل التي جوز ان تكون كل واحدة منها غير متناهية لا بد ان يكون تأليفها من علل ومعلومات"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي تجلى لذاته بذاته ... اما بعد فهذا هو الكتاب المسمى بمسلك الافهام والنور المنجي من الظلام المعروف بمجلي المشتمل على الاصول اليقينية والمنازل العرفانية ... المنسوب الى امام السالكين وقطب الموحدين محمد بن الشيخ زين الدين ابي الحسن بن حسام الدين بن ابراهيم ابن ابي الجمهور الهجري الاحساوي المعروف بابن ابي جمهور ... هذا هو الكتاب المعروف بالمجلي الموسوم بمسلك الافهام والنور المنجي من الظلام المنسوب الى رئيس المحققين والموحدين المعروف بابن ابي جمهور الاحسائي ... بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم اللهم يا ذا المن الجسيم والطول العظيم والشأن القويم والامر الحكيم ..."', 'Title from heading on incipit page (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', "Careful (though apparently incomplete) copy of Ibn Abī Jumhūr's (d. after 1499) Kitāb al-Mujlī or Mujlī mirʼāt al-Nūr al-munjī, a supercommentary upon his own kalām work, Maslak al-afhām fī ʻilm al-kalām and its commentary, al-Nūr al-munjī min al-ẓalām."])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Grapes with crown; eagle with initials GFA in roman. For the latter see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), nos. 1261 and 1262.', 'Text and tables rubricated; foliation in hand of copyist; extensive notes and calculations in another hand inside covers and on flyleaves.', 'Date in title on p. [1].', 'Text (not this copy) published.', 'Almost entirely tables for timekeeping, perhaps for Istanbul (latitude 41⁰)?; short sharḥ in Turkish on sine of horizon on p. [73]; cf. David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 175.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Andrea Galvani of Pordenone. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 36 and no. 860.', 'Contains tables and diagrams.', 'Text rubricated; marginal corrections in hand of copyist; a few pp. are missing.', 'For another copy of this text see Mich. Isl. Ms. 739. For the Muqniʻ itself, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 795,11.', 'Appended to this work beginning on p. [194], several other faṣls, beginning with one entitled faṣl fī maʻrifat istikhrāj darajat al-shams... and including several on different writing-systems (aqlām) for numbers.', 'Commentary by the author on "a poem on the methods of timekeeping used by Abī Miqraʻ." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 143.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 599', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, hand, etc. suggest 19th century, perhaps latter 19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 33" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark purplish-red cloth with red leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in yellow wove paper ; spine stamped with rows of anular motifs ; sewn in white thread, two or four stations, varies ; overall in fairly good condition with only minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support: European wove paper ; crisp, light brown in color.', "Decoration: Headings and keywords 'rubricated' (red to purple ink) ; overlining and textual dividers in the form of hāʼ in same red-purple ink.", 'Script: Naskh with elements of ruqʻah ; compact hand ; partially seriffed with sharp leftward serif on occasional lām (particularly final, freestanding lām in قال) with slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in strokes though three dots usually distinct, closed and open counters.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; impression of ruling board evident.', 'Collation: i, 11 V(110), IV (118), V (128), IV (136), I (138), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "ببروق انوار هدايته داعين الى طريق اتباعه مزينين بزينة متابعته عالمين بما يرث لنا رضاك ... امين يا ارحم الراحمين امين يا ارحم الراحمين امين يا ارحم الراحمين ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله ... واصحابه مع البركات والتسليم اجمعين م م م م م م م م م م م"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الملك المنان الجواد المقدس عن الامثال والانداد الذي حكم على الخلائق في ازل الازل بالاشقاء [و] الاسعاد ... وبعد فيقول جامع هذا الكتاب هداه الله الى طريق الحق والصواب لا يخفي على ارباب البصائر والمعالي اولى الدرجات والذخائر الموالي ..."', 'Title from heading at opening (p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Clear copy of the Ṣūfī work attributed to Aḥmad ibn ʻAlī al-Rifāʻī (d.1182), founder of the Rifāʻīyah order.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Andrea Galvani of Pordenone. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 36 and no. 860.', 'Title, text and tables rubricated; at top of p. [2]: yā kabīkaj.', 'Date and name of copyist in colophon: waqafa itmāmahu fī yawm al-sabt al-mubārak al-muwāfiq li-tisʻah wa-ʻishrūn min shahr Rabīʻ al-ākhir sanat alf wa-miʾatayn thalāthah wa-sabʻūn min al-hijrah al-nabawīyah [i.e. December 1856] ... ʻalá yad al-faqīr ... ʻAbduh Riḍwān ibn Muḥammad ibn Sulaymān.', 'Pp. [1-76]. Bound with: [2] ʻAbd Allāh Fikrī, Risālah fī muqāranat baʻḍ mabāḥith al-hayʾah bi-al-wārid fī al-nuṣūṣ al-sharʻīyah, pp. 1-32; [3] Ḥusayn Zāʾid, Kitāb al-maṭlaʻ al-saʻīd fī ḥisābāt al-kawākib ʻalá al-raṣad al-jadīd, pp. 1-89.', 'Astronomical tables and instructions for using them to set pocket watches; also contains schedules entitled Mawqiʻ al-sāʻāt ʻalá ḥasab awqāt al-ṣalawāt by Ramaḍān ibn Ṣāliḥ al-Safaṭī al-Khawānikī, on determining the times for the five daily prayers.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 641', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.141, copied by one Maḥmūd ( محمود ) who provides his name (preceded by an expression of humility) in a series of separated letters in their isolated forms "ف ق ي ر ض ع ي ف م ح م و د", with transcription completed 15 Jumādá I 1201 [ca. 5 March 1787]. As appears in preceding authorial colophon (also on p.141), composition (taswīd) completed end of Jumādá II 1163 [early June 1750].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From \'title page\' (p.1) "IL 376" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Boards lost though traces of spine (red leather) and spine lining and hinges (red linen) remain ; perhaps once Type II binding (traces of flap) ; sewn in heavy cream or light pink thread, two stations ; worked endbands in cream over red core, fair condition ; overall in quite poor condition with covers lost, lifting and losses of spine leather and lining, much staining and edge tears, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 8 laid liens per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-28 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark (95 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) ; quite dense and sturdy, well-burnished ; some pigment burn to breakthrough at frame of written area in opening leaves.', "Decoration: Headings, keywords, excerpts of poem being commented upon, and colophon rubricated ; written area at opening of codex (first two quires, through p.40) surrounded by 'gilt' (gone to green) rule-border that has burned the paper to breakthrough in some leaves ; same 'gilt' pigment (now gone to green) has been applied to the margins of the incipit page ; elsewhere (p.41 to close of codex) written area surrounded by red rule-border ; textual dividers in the form of red hāʼ ; overlining in red ; diagrams in red and black appear occasionally in margins (see p.33, 50, 120, etc.).", 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Persianate Iraqi or Turkish [?] hand ; mainly seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on all ascenders (including free-standing alif) though towards end of the text lest consistent, effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders (rightward descenders large and tapered), elongated vertical strokes, dramatic sweeping shaqq on kāf, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots, partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: 6 V(60), VI (72), 2 V(92) ; almost exclusively quinions ; final two quires (pp.142-184) ruled but left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Authorial," reads "قد وقع الفراغ من تسويده في سلخ جمادى الاخر قبيل العصر يوم الخميس في سنه ۱۱٦٣ من الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلوة واحمل التسليم والحمد لله اولا واخرا واختتاما" ; "Scribal," reads "من بعده هذه الكتابة سنه ۱۲۰۱ في شهر جمادى ف ق ي ر ض ع ي ف م ح م و د الاول يوم الاحد نصف الشهر قبيل الظهر', 'Explicit: "فانه لا يستعظم قرب الحق من العبد والبقاء بالحق الا المحجوب بكثافة نفسانية وبظلمة صفة حيوانية وفقه الله للاعتقاد الخالص وجعل خاتمته على خير تتمة اللهم اجعل ما الهمتني من علوم حقيقتك ... سبحان ربك رب العزة عما يصفون وسلام على المرسلين والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي نشر لنا ما انطوى من الطريق المحمدية واظهر بنا ما اختفى من الحقائق الواحدية ... وبعد اقول وانا الفقير السيد علي القادري البندنيجي لما فرغت من نظم قصيدتي العينية سألني بعض المحبين ان اجعل لها شرحا وجيزا ..."', 'Title from rubricated heading at opening (incipit page, p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy of the author's commentary upon his own work, al-ʻAynīyah, a ṣūfī poem in ʻayn."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 965', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 114', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "رسالة المظاهر للشيرازي | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Machine wove paper of two different types, one beige in color, the other medium cream.', 'Decoration: Text executed entirely in red ink.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; careful, compact hand in a medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 11 lines per page.', "Collation: Pages between sections left blank with some serving as 'title pages' (see pp.41, 81, 113) ; pagination in pencil, Hindu-Arabic numerals through p.39 ; at p.40 begins pagination in pencil, Western numerals, presumably supplied during digitization ; leaves left blank or partially blank between sections.", 'Explicit: "فانصب في طب الرضا والى ربك فارغب في محبته تم الكتاب"', 'Incipit: "سبحانك اللهم يا مفيض الجود والوجود ويا ولي الفضل والنور يا شافي امراض الصدور ...اما بعد لما كان افضل السعادات والوسائل ورئيس الحسنات والفضائل اكتساب الحكمة الحقة الالهية وتكميل القوة النظرية بتحصيل العلوم الحقيقية والمعارف اليقينية ..."', 'Title from rubricated heading at opening on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of an apparent abridgment of Kitāb al-Maẓāhir al-ilāhīyah, a philosophical work by Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī (d.1641), renowned philosopher of the Ṣafavid period, bound up with a section labeled "المبدأ والمعاد" likely intended as the third section of Isl. Ms. 979 and Isl. Ms. 980 (see pp.81-112).'])

en: (count: ['Contains geometrical diagrams.', 'Text and diagrams rubricated; interlinear and marginal corrections in hand of copyist.', 'On theoretical astronomy.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Andrea Galvani in script with Face-in-the-Moon in double-bordered shield. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 36 and no. 860.', 'Tables rubricated; foliation added in hand of copyist.', 'Sexagesimal multiplication tables.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 233', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.95, executed by Hakkakzade Hafız Feyzullah with transcription completed in the year 1200 [1785 or 6].', 'Former shelfmark: "476 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "40" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.5).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in silver-flecked olive-green tinted European laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry central lozenge-shaped panel in gold- and silver-tooled semé pattern of rosette stamps along with decorative border on black and red leathers consisting of two guilloché rolls accented by gold fillets ; design continues on flap ; accompanied by slipcase with tail edge and pentagonal flap (carrying title) and woven pull tape, also covered in red leather (lined in yellow paper) with scalloped mandorla and pendants filled with tooled / cut and gold-filled vegetal composition over black leather onlays, as well as rosette stamp and stroke accents and guilloché roll border flanked by gold fillets ; sewn in pink thread, four stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and cream, good condition ; overall in good condition with only minor abrasion at edges, repairs to joints and hinges in Japanese paper ; both volume and slipcase housed in custom box.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct), thin, crisp and transluscent though sturdy, heavily sized and burnished to glossy, beige in color ; pastedowns and flyleaves in European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Brilliant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.6 consisting of w-shaped piece with cartouche carrying title "هذا اصحاب بدر" in red and accented by scalloped domes in gold against a field of blue all overlaid with swirling vegetal pattern in white, pink, yellow, blue, mint green, etc. ; entire piece is set in a well of green, gold, and white bands with red and gold accents and is surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) ; simpler illuminated tailpieces flanking close of Aṣḥāb Badr and Aṣḥāb Badr min al-shuhadāʼon p.52 and p.65, and at opening of Aṣḥāb Badr min al-shuhadāʼ (p.52) and Munājāt aṣḥāb Badr (p.65) fine illuminated headpieces carrying the titles in red ; superbly executed illuminated tailpiece accenting close of the munājāt and colophon on p.95, consisting of cloud-bands in gold, some overlaid with vegetal decoration, as well as narrow rectangular panel with swirling vegetal decoration in shades of blue, yellow, white, and pink on a blue ground and a larger rectangular panel reminiscent of book cover design in shades of gold, pink, blue, yellow, mint green, etc. surrounded by heavy interlace border ; written area surrounded by heavy gold frame accented by narrower gold, black and red fillets ; eight panels outlined by narrow gold band ; textual dividers in the form of elaborate illuminated rosettes with accents in white, red, blue, pink, etc. appear in the text of the munājāt ; titles and benediction (tarḍiyah) following each Companion\'s name rubricated.', 'Script: Exquisite specimen of Ottoman calligraphy ; a splendid naskh, seriffed, with characteristic tilt to the left, and sweeping tails on final yāʼ, alif maqṣūrah, and nūn ; fully vocalized.', "Layout: For text listing the Companions, written area divided to eight panels, two columns with four panels in each column ; within each panel appears a Companion's name and benediction (tarḍiyah) in roughly three lines, for a total of eight Companions per page ; text of the munājāt written in 9 lines per page ; frame-ruled.", 'Collation: iii, 4 V(40), III (46), iii ; quinions and a ternion ; traces of catchwords (often cut off) ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, appears at center head of the recto of some leaves (see p.25, etc.) and lower center of the verso of other leaves (see p.48, etc.) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (some flyleaves paginated).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads: "كتبه المذنب حافظ فيض الله المعروف بحكاك زاده لسنة مأتين وألف من هجرة من له العز والشرف"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '5. p.96-p.100 : [blank].', '4. p.65-p.95 : Hādhā Munājāt aṣḥāb Badr.', '3. p.52-p.65 Hādhā Aṣḥāb Badr min al-shuhadāʼ.', '2. p.6-p.52 : Aṣḥāb Badr.', '1. p.1-p.5 : [blank].', 'Exquisite calligraphic specimen in the hand of Hakkakzade Hafız Feyzullah, employing a listing of the ṣaḥābah or Companions of the Prophet who took part in the battle of Badr, followed by a prayer (munājāt) addressed to them.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1003', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, hand, etc. may suggest 19th century.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 152', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green textured cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with "الصراح في الغريب | جمال القرشي | J.H.D." ; now sewn in white thread over recessed cords, false raised bands at spine ; overall in fairly good condition with minor fraying of cloth at board corners.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 7 lines per cm. and chain lines unclear, cloudy formation with fibers visible, lightly burnished ; final leaf anomalous, European paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines horizonal spaced 28 mm. apart ; insect damage throughout (small holes), some repaired with paper fills (sometimes partially obscuring text) ; edges and corners of some pages filled with non-European paper ; first page re-mounted on non-European paper ; water-damage (discoloration, cockled pages) ; on bottom corners of last few quires old adhesive from repairs causing several pages to stick together at edges.', 'Decoration: Occasional keywords and section headings rubricated ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; several hands ; all mainly serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, contrast in thickness between vertical and horizontal strokes, horizontal lengthening of letters, pointing in conjoined dots and stroke looking like upside down comma, use of hāʼ makhṭūfah for initial hāʼ and hāʼ mudghamah for medial hāʼ ; at pp.559-560 hand changes abruptly to much thinner line, more condensed with more words per line.', 'Layout: Written in 23-25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 66 IV (528), IV+3 (539) ; exclusively quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of oblique strokes in black ink on top outer corner of right-hand page and bottom outer corner of left-hand page (sometimes one vertical stroke and one diagonal) ; catchwords present ; irregular Western numerals in pencil appear in top left corner of some rectos (see p.21, 81, 161, 201, etc.), reverse of text direction ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "الدخول كانهم اي من اجل الدخول و توضع موضوع علي قوله تع و منهم من"', 'Incipit: "قال الفقير الى مولاه الغني ... ابو الفضل محمد بن عمر بن خالد المدعو بجمال القرشي ... احمد الله وهو المحمود بكل اللغات وجلها واشكره وهو المشكور على كثير الهان ... وبعد فان صحاح اللغة دواء العلة لسقام الجهل وشقاء الغلة ازوي الفعل ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the abridgement and rendering into Persian by Abū al-Faz̤l Muḥammad ibn ʻUmar ibn Khālid Jamāl al-Qarshī of the renowned Arabic lexicon, Tāj al-lughah wa-ṣiḥāḥ al-ʻArabīyah, commonly known as al-Ṣiḥāḥ, by Abū Naṣr Ismāʻīl ibn Ḥammād al-Jawharī (d.1009?). Description provided mainly by Sarah Mirza.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 957', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.114, transcription of main work completed Rajab 1131 [May-June 1719]. As appears on p.120, text of the Istikhārah apparently entered 1271 [1854 or 5] and of following fāʼidah 1281 [1864 or 5].', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 106', 'Binding: Boards covered in textured black cloth (repeating vegetal patern) with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "در الفاخرة" ; sewn in white thread over three recessed cords ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion, moisture and pest damage.', 'Support: European laid paper of at least two types ; through p.66 in type with 11-12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of grapes (raisin) with stem under cartouche and crown (see pp.20, 22, 28, 32, 34, etc.), thin though sturdy, dark cream to beige in color, burnished ; from p.67 mainly in a similar "raisin" type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-24 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of grapes (raisin) under cartouche with initials "I S B" and crown (see pp.70, 76, 84, 88, 98, etc.), thicker and sturdier, medium cream in color, burnished ; final gathering in still possibly another type, lighter in color and well-burnished, though otherwise quite similar.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke overlining keywords) rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) and naskh ; mainly two clear Turkish hands, each in a medium to bold line ; opening through opening lines of p.66 in nastaʻlīq (talik), serifless with effect of inclination to the right, slight effect of words descending to baseline, some elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in strokes rather than distinct dots ; p.66 through close of main work on p.114 in naskh, mainly serifless with effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots ; final works in various hands.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 6 V(60), i ; exclusively quinions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of ه (hāʼ or khamsah) in black ink on the upper outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "قد وقع الفراغ من تحرير الدقائق اخبار [كذا] في شهر رجب بعد النصف سنة احدى وثلثون ومائة والف سنة ١١٣١"', 'Explicit: "قال انبي عليه السلام ان اهل الجنة يخرج من اجسادهم يأكلون وشربون ثم يصير طعامهم ريحا كريح المسك والكافور اللهم ادخلنا الجنة بمنك وكرمك امين والحمد لله وحده وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم تسليما كثيرا الى يوم الدين امين تمت"', 'Incipit: "وقد جاء في الخبر ان الله تعالى خلق الشجرة [شجرة] ولها اربعة اغصان فسماها شجرة اليقين ثم خلق نوب محمد عليه السلام في حجاب درة بيضاء مثله مكثل الطاوس ووضعه على تلك الشجرة فسبح عليها مقدار سبعين الف سنة ثم خلق الله تعالى مرآة الحياة ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of ʻAbd al-Raḥīm ibn Aḥmad al-Qāḍī\'s eschatological work on events of the end of time and the afterlife drawn from assorted ḥadīth. Followed by several brief excerpts at close (from p.114 including "Istikhārah ʻaẓīmah" on pp.116-120), all likely entered later.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 961', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.62, copied by Muṣṭafá Ibrāhīm, khādim al-Ustādh al-Khalwatī, from a copy held in the Khedival Library (al-Kutubkhānah al-Khidīwīyah / الكتبخانة الخديوية ) in Darb al-Jamāmīz palace ( سراى درب الجماميز ) with transcription completed 23 Shaʻbān 1294 [ca. 2 September 1877].', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 110', 'Binding: Boards covered in black cloth ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves printed in a geometric design resembling a scale pattern in dark maroon ; cover gold stamped "فيصل التفرقة" ; pulled by conservation such that cover / case and sewing threads are housed in one envelope and text pages in two others (five leaves per slide / folder, three slides per envelope) with all envelopes in one larger envelope.', 'Support: Brown machine wove paper, extremely brittle.', 'Decoration: Keywords rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand in a medium line ; mainly serifless with effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots, final yāʼ often unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 3 V(30), i (originally), exclusively quinions ; now pulled / disbound with conjugate leaves divided ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "وكان الفراغ من كتابة هذه النسخة النفيسة يوم السبت الموافق ثلاثة وعشرون من [شعبان] سنة اربعة وتسعون ومائتان [كذا] بعد الالف من هجرة سيد المرسلين على يد كاتبها الفقير مصطفى ابراهيم خادم الاستاذ الخلوتي واغفر اللهم لكاتبها ولقارئها ولسامعها ولكافة المسلمين اجمعين امين وهذه النسخة منقولة من نخسة موجودة بالكتبخانة الخديوية بمصر المحروسة بسراى درب الجماميز"', 'Explicit: "وعلى القانون الذي ينبغي ان يتبع فيها فاقنع به والسلام"', 'Incipit: "قال الامام ابو حامد محمد بن محمد بن محمد الغزالي رحمه الله احمد الله تعالى استسلاما لعزته واستتماما لنعمته واستغناما ما لتوفيقه وطاعته ... اما بعد فاني رأيتك ايها الاخ الشفيق والصديق المتعصب موعور الصدر منقسم الفكر لما قرع سمعك من طائفة من الحسدة على بعض كتبنا المصنفة في اسرار معاملات الدين وزعمهم ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of al-Ghazālī\'s (d.1111) concise treatise of dogmatic theology, partly directed against the Bāṭinīyah (i.e. the Ismāʻīlīs), but primarily a defense of his own views on taʼwīl, and on tawātur and ijmāʻ as sources of religious knowledge (see Watt, "al-G̲H̲azālī" in EI2).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 644', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on pp.624-625, copied by Ṣāliḥ ibn Tāj al-Dīn ibn Aḥmad ibn Yāsīn al-Wāṭī [?] al-Mālikī from the author\'s copy in his own hand ("nuskhat al-muʼallif ... ʻallaqahu jāmiʻuh ... bi-yadih al-fāniyah") with transcription supposedly completed 8 Rabīʻ I 1021 [ca. 9 May 1612]. As appears in preceding authorial colophon on p.625, composition (jamʻ) and transcription of the author\'s copy completed 1 Ṣafar 1029 [ca. 7 January 1620]. It seems likely that the copyist mistakenly repeated عشرين when listing the date of transcription for this copy and may have intended ثلاثين (implying 1031, i.e. 1622) or another decade, though paper, etc. do suggest early 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and lower cover "IL 405" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in well-worn paper (likely once marbled, compare envelope flap) with red leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in yellow laid paper ; no evidence of having ever been sewn ; over all in poor condition with much abrasion, staining and moisture damage, lifting and losses of paper and leather, etc. ; ill-fitting and serving as wrapper for the unsewn gatherings (never attached to textblock).', 'Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-25 mm. apart (horizontal), crown-star-crescent watermark with "CD" [?] below (92 mm. tall, see pp.10-11) ; well-sized and burnished (even glazed to glossy), cream in color, fairly thick and sturdy ; some staining.', 'Decoration: Headings, keywords and abbreviation symbols (mainly sigla) rubricated.', "Script: Naskh ; clear Egyptian, 'Syrian' or Ḥijāzī [?] hand ; mainly serifless but with head-serif on occasional free-standing alif, very slight effect of tilt to the left, pointing in distinct dots and often slanted down toward baseline (alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ), some elongation of horizontal strokes, a mix of closed and open counters.", 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 2 V(20), IV (28), 6 V(88), IV (96), 5 V(146), IV (154), 10 V(254), IV (262), V (272), IV (280), 3 V(310), 1 (311), II (315) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages each between pp.555-56 and pp.585-86).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "وكان الفراغ من كتابة هذه النسخة في يوم الخميس المبارك قبل الزوال ثامن شهر ربيع الاول الذي هو من شهور سنة احدى وعشرين [ثلاثين ؟] والف من الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلاة والسلام علقه بيده الفانية افقر الخلق الى ربه العظيم صالح بن تاج الدين بن احمد بن يس الواطي بلدا المالكي مذهبا غفر الله له ولوالديه ... هذا واني التمس من فضل من وقف على هذا الكتاب ان يدعو لكاتبه ... وختم لي .. وله الحظ العظيم الاوفي في القبر وفي المقر الجليل الاسنى بمنه وكرمه امين امين تم اودعت في هذا الكتاب شهادة ... من ذلك الذي ما ساقط ومن له الحسنى فقط محمد الهادي الذي عليه جبريل هبط"', 'Explicit: "مع تردد فيما بين عثمان وعلي والاصح تفصيل عثمان على علي رضي الله عنهم اجمعين وهنا ذكرت جملة الفرق الثلاث وسبعين في تلخيص التجريد اللهم ... كما وفقتنا الوضع ما الهمتنا وجمع ما علمتنا ... سبحان ربك رب العزة عما يصفون والسلام على المرسلين والحمد لله رب العالمين وهذا اخر ما في نسخة المؤلف رحمه الله تعالى رحمة واسعة قال رحمه الله وكان الفراغ من جمعها غرة شهر صفر الخير الذي هو من شهور سنة تسع وعشرين والف ثم قال علقه جامعه الحقير ابراهيم اللقاني المالكي بيده الفانية ... امين انتهى"', 'Incipit: "وصلى على سيدنا محمد صاحب الخلق ... الحمد لله الذي تفرد بوجوب وجوده ففاضت الحوادث كلها عن كرمه وجوده ... اما بعد فان افضل العلوم علم دين الله وشرائعه فان به حفظ الايمان والاسلام الذين هما من اجل ودائعه و افضله علم العقائد ... وقد وضعت فيه منظومتي المسماة بجوهرة التوحيد ... وشرحتها قبل هذا شرحين جليلين احدهما عمدة المريد وثانيهما تلخيص التجريد ثم ادركتني رحمة الضعاف ... حين طلب مني جماعة من الاخوان وجملة من الخلان شرحا لها لا يكون قاصرا عن افادة المقاصرين خاليا عن الاسهاب والاطناب ... فاجبتهم الى ذلك واثقا باقدار الكريم المالك ومسميا له بهداية المريد بجوهرة التوحيد ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1) and opening matter (preface) on p.8.", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine early copy of Ibrāhīm ibn Ibrāhīm al-Laqānī's (d.1631 or 2) third commentary (after his ʻUmdat al-murīd and Talkhīṣ al-tajrīd, see opening matter on p.8) upon his Jawharat al-tawḥīd, a theological poem."])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Initials AG in roman; stars in shield with crown. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 36 and nos. 860 and 3886.', 'Text and title rubricated; marginal corrections, notes, finding aids, and foliation in hand of copyist (same as that of Mich. Isl. Ms. 814,2).', 'Date and name of owner/copyist in colophon: wa-kāna al-farāgh min kitābat hādhā al-kitāb yawm al-ithnayn al-mubārak li-khamsah wa-ʻishrīn khalat min shahr Muḥarram al-ḥarām iftitāḥ sanat 1266 [i.e. 11 December 1849] ʻalá yad ... ʻAbd al-Ḥamīd Bīk Nāfiʻ bi-ḥall al-marḥūm Khalīl Afandī mudīr al-Daqahlīyah.', 'For an earlier copy of this work, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 696.', 'Pp. [1-54]. Bound with: [2] Risālah fī ʻilm aḥkām al-shiʻrah al-yamānīyah wa-ḥulūl al-qamar fī al-ithnay ʻashar burjan, pp. [56-89]; [3] Astronomical tables, pp. [97-189].', 'Also contains the text of the manẓūmah (treatise in verse) on timekeeping by ʻAyyād al-Maḥallī on which the commentary is based (pp. 51-52).', '"A commentary on a poem on timekeeping by Aḥmad ʻAyyād." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 113.'])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated; corrections and marginal notes in hand of copyist and others.', 'Date and name of copyist in colophon: wāfaqa al-farāgh min taʻlīq hādhihi al-risālah fī ʻashar shahr Shawwāl sanat 1220 ʻalá yad al-faqīr Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm [1 January 1806].', 'For a later copy of this text, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 814,1.', '"A commentary on a poem on timekeeping by Aḥmad ʻAyyād." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 113.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1002', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.207, copied by ʻAlī al-Batanūnī al-Mālikī with transcription completed 24 Jumādá II 1273 [ca. 19 February 1857].', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 151', 'Binding: Boards covered in black cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "كنوز الحقائق" ; sewn in white thread, five stations ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion.', 'Support: European (specifically Venetian made by the Galvani firm) laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 30 mm. apart (horizontal), watermark of crescent with face (human profile) in shield (see pp.4, 96, 208, etc. and compare Walz, The Paper trade of Egypt and the Sudan, 88-9) and countermark of "V G" (see pp.2, 22, 92, 206, etc.), quite sturdy, cream in color, well-burnished ; some cockling and staining.', 'Decoration: Headings, keywords and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; compact, somewhat angular Egyptian hand in a medium line ; partially though irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on occasional alif, effect of tilt to the left, slight effect of words descending to baseline, closed and open counters, pointing mainly in distinct dots (though three dots often represented by stroke looking like inverted comma), alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ, kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 25 lines per page divided to two columns (a layout which the copyist took to be intended by the author, see note in colophon on p.207) ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 4 V(40), VI (52), 4 V(92), VI (104), i ; quinions alternating with senions in a regular pattern exemplary of the deliberation of the copyist who describes the discrepancy in number of quires between his copy and the exemplar from which he copied (i.e. the exemplar had ten additional quires due to that copyist not including two ḥadīth per line) in a note in the colophon (see p.207) ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals under letter kāf in upper outer corner of recto of opening leaf of each quire ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," mainly triangular, reads "هذا وقد وجدت النسخة التي نقلت منها زائدة على عشرة كراريس وسبب الزيادة ان الكتاب ربما كتب حديثا في سطر واحد مع ان غرض المؤلف ليس كذلك ولا سيما التراجم التي للحروف فانها اخذت نحو ورقة وبالجملة لو تحري الكاتب كتابة كل حديثين في سطر كما نيه عليه المؤلف اول الكتاب لم تزد النسخة على عشرة كراريس الا التراجم ونصف ورقة في الاول ونصف ورقة في الاخر هذا ووافق فراغ نسخه ليلة الخميس لست ليالي بقين من شهر جمادى الاخر او سبعة منه سنة الف ومائتين وثلاث وسبعين من الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلاة والسلام على يد افقر العباد واحوجهم لعفوه علي البتنوني المالكي عفي عنه بمنه وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم كمل الكتاب تكاملت ..."', 'Explicit: "اليوم الموعود يوم القيامة ت اليوم انتقصت العرب ملك العجم خ وهذا اوان الفراغ من اعادة نظم غرره واجادة استحكام نسج نقوش درره بحمد الله وعونه وحسن توفيقه والله الموفق للصواب واليه المرجع والمآب وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العظيم وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي كسى اهل الحديث رداء الشرف في كل اقليم ورفع شأنهم واعلى ذكرهم في كل حديث وقديم ... وبعد فيقول العبد الفقير القائم على قدم التقصير عبد الرؤوف المناوي هذا كتاب عجاب من تأمله رحلت عليه المسرة من كل باب جمعت فيه زهاء عشرة الاف حديث في عشرة كراريس كل كراس الف حديث في كل ورقة مائة حديث تقرأ بالعرض على العادة وفي نصف العرض بالطول ومن اعلى الى الاسفل ومن اسفل الى اعلى كل نصف مسطر مستقل بنفسه ورتبته على حروف المعجم ليسهل تناوله على العرب والعجم ... وسميته كنوز الحقائق في حديث خير الخلائق ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of a compilation of 10,000 ḥadīth from the major collections assembled by ʻAbd al-Raʼūf ibn Tāj al-ʻĀrifīn al-Munāwī (d.1621).'])

en: (count: ['Contains tables and astronomical diagrams.', 'Text rubricated.', "Date of compilation in title: 14 June 1884. Date of copy and editor/copyist's name in colophon: tammat wa-bi-al-miskah ʻammat wa-kāna al-farāgh min naql hādhihi al-nuskhah al-ʻaẓīmah alladhī laysa la-hā wujūd fī yawm al-sabt al-muwāfiq ʻasharah khalat min shahr Ṣafar sanat 1302 [29 November 1884] ʻalá yad nāsikhihā al-faqīr ilá Allāh al-qadīr Aḥmad Maḥmūd Rāghib.", 'A compendium of astronomical lore.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 590', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at close of Qiṣaṣ al-anbiyāʼ (p.402), copied by Ibrāhīm ibn Muṣṭafá with transcription completed 23 Rajab 1164 [ca. 17 June 1751]. Transcription of Qiṣṣat Aṣḥāb al-Kahf contemporary.', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and fore edge flap label, "IL 278a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper, hinges in printed mottle paper, envelope flap lined in marbled paper (mainly lime green, pin, and dark lavender) ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal decoration, compare Déroche class. NSd 7) with tooled rosette pendants and accents, as well as tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps flanked by blind rules ; sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in white and red, good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and minor losses of leather on upper board, etc. ; spine repair in cream textile (linen), holding detached upper cover to textblock.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of crown with name and grapes below (see p.8, 10, etc.), "LANGUADOC" (see p.24, 28, etc.), etc. ; beige in color, thin and crisp though dense and sturdy, well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; overlining in red ; simple headpiece at opening of Qiṣṣat Aṣḥāb al-Kahf on p.40, consisting of red, line-drawn semi-circular pieces ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; written area throughout surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Naskh ; an elegant Iraqi [?] hand with Turkish and Persianate features ; partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs, marked effect of tilt to the left, elongation of horizontal strokes, curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, I+1 (3), V-1 (12), 2 V(32), 2 IV+1 (50), 16 V(210) ; chiefly quinions ; final leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes leaves carrying table of contents and excludes final leaves left blank).', 'Colophon: [Qiṣaṣ al-anbiyāʼ] "تم الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب من يد الحقير المعترف بالعجز والتقصير [..؟] ابراهيم بن مصطفى غفر الله ذنوبهما في ٢٣ ر سنة ١١٦٤"', 'Explicit: [Qiṣaṣ al-anbiyāʼ] "وانما صح ان الموصل قبلت وانما يحتمل ان الله تع اهلكم بكفرهم والله اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب" [Qiṣṣat Aṣḥāb al-kahf] ; "وقالت اليهود هم منا وذكر انه كان في تلك الزمان ملك مؤمن وملك كافر فتقاتلوا فغلب ملك المؤمن على الكافر فبنى عليهم مسجدا وتصديق ذلك في كتار الله تع قال الذين غلبوا على امرهم لنتخدن عليهم مسجدا م م م"', 'Incipit: [Qiṣaṣ al-anbiyāʼ] "قال الشيخ الامام محمد بن عبد الله الكسائي رحمه الله تعالى الحمد لله الذي انبت الخلق نباتا ... هذا كتاب جمعت فيه المبتدات من خلق السموات والارضين وخلق الجن والانس واوائل احوال النبيين عليهم السلام ..." ; [Qiṣṣat Aṣḥāb al-kahf] "سئل عن ابن عباس رضي الله عنه اي اية في كتاب الله تعالى اعجب قال الايات اللتي تكلم الله بها وسميها عجبا قيل ما هي قال قوله تع ان اصحاب الكهف والرقيم كانوا من آياتنا عجبا ...""', "Title from 'title page' (p.7).", 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.404-p.414 : Qiṣṣat Aṣḥāb Ahl al-kahf [i.e. Qiṣṣat Aṣḥāb al-kahf] / ʻAbd Allāh ibn ʻAbbās ibn ʻAbd al-Muṭṭalib al-Qurashī al-Hāshimī.', '3. p.403 : [blank].', '2. p.7-p.402 : Hādhā Kitāb Qiṣaṣ al-anbiyāʼ / Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd Allāh al-Kisāʼī.', '1. p.1-p.6 : [table of contents].', 'Elegant copy of the famous work on the creation and legends of the prophets prior to Muḥammad, followed by the relation of the legend of the Companions of the Cave (Seven Sleepers of Ephesus) attributed to Ibn ʻAbbās (d.688?). Table of contents at opening (pp.1-6).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 970', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on pp.128-129, copied by Muḥammad ibn Yūsuf ibn ʻAlī al-Qāhirī al-Azharī al-Shāfiʻī with transcription completed 6 Ramaḍān 1087 [ca. 15 November 1676].', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 119', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding), serving as a custom wrapper or case in portfolio style with flaps extending from the edges of the lower board and cloth tape tie closure ; board linings and flap coverings in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents "شرح السعد للتصريف الزنجاني | J.H.D." ; sewing virtually gone (occasional trace of primaries in yellow), though originally in two stations, many bifolia split ; textblock dramatically and very unevenly trimmed (most of upper margin lost except where glosses present) and set into portfolio (now fitting large) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-24 mm. apart (horizontal), three crescents watermark (75 mm. tall, parallel to chains, see p.28, 29, etc.), and "AD" countermark (see p.9, etc.) ; light cream in color, well-burnished to glossy, sturdy though quite crisp and fairly transluscent ; staining.', 'Decoration: Headings, some keywords and text being commented upon rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; compact, angular Egyptian hand in a medium line ; seriffed with blob or dot-like serifs (resembling the dots used for pointing) on most ascenders, slight effect of tilt to the left, mainly curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah usually pointed as yāʼ ; extensively vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V-1 (9), 5 V(59), III (65) ; Chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, presumably supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular and triangular, reads "تم الكتاب بحمد الله وعونه ووافق الفراغ منه في صبيحة يوم الخميس المبارك سادس شهر رمضان المعظم قدره من شهور سنة سبعة وثمانين والف من الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلاة والسلام وعلقها بيده الفانية افقر خلق الله واحوجهم الى عفوه ومغفرته محمد بن يوسف ابن علي بن ابي جميل القاهري منشأ الازهري سكنا ومجاورة الشافعي مذهبا غفر الله له ولوالديه وللمسلمين امين م"', 'Explicit: "او فتحة او غيرها للنوع وكذلك البواقي والله اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع المآب وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى آله وصحبه"', 'Incipit: "ان اروى زهر يخرج في رياض الكلام من الاكمام ... حمدا لله على كل تواتر نعمائة الزاهرة الظاهرة وترادف الائه المتوافرة المتظاهرة ... وبعد فيقول الفقير الى الله الغني مسعود بن عمر القاضي التفتازاني ... لما رأيت مختصر التصريف الذي صنفه الامام الفاضل العالم قدوة المحققين عز الملة والدين الزنجاني رحمه الله مختصرا ينطوي على مباحث شريفة ويحتوي على قواعد لطيفة سنح لي ان اشرحه شرحا ..."', "Title from 'title page' inscription (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of the popular commentary by al-Taftāzānī on the celebrated treatise on morphology (ṣarf) by ʻIzz al-Dīn ʻAbd al-Wahhāb ibn Ibrāhīm al-Zanjānī (fl. mid 13th century), known as Mabādiʼ al-taṣrīf or al-Taṣrīf al-ʻIzzī.'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Face-in-the-Moon in double-bordered shield; Carbera De Mori Vittorio in script. For the former see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 19th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 35 and no. 860.', 'Contains geometrical diagrams.', 'Text rubricated; marginal corrections and numbering of each kurrāsah in hand of copyist.', 'Date in colophon: 5 Jumādá al-ūlá sanat 1312 hijrīyah [4 November 1894].', 'For the sharḥ of Qāḍī Zādah on this work see Mich. Isl. Mss. 726 and 727.', 'Text (not this copy) published.', '"This work ... summarizes with their abridged demonstrations thirty-five fundamental propositions of Euclid\'s geometry." Hâmit Dilgan, "al-Samarqandī," in Dictionary of Scientific Biography, v. 12, p. 91a.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 478', 'Origin: As appears in colophons on p.295 and p.296, copied by Muḥammad ibn ʻAlī ibn Abī ʻAbd Allāh al-Rābiṭī [?] al-Tilimsānī with transcription completed in the first part of Ṣafar 1047 [?] [June-July 1637].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (paginated pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 60b" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather with and dark red leather over spine and fore edge flap (likely repairs) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in pale pink or beige laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped (with now beige paper onlays) mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition) with tooled rosette accents (small circular and large eight petaled) and tooled rules ; now sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in dark navy blue and yellow, quite good condition ; overall in somewhat fair condition with some abrasion, staining, etc.', "Support: European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 36-39 mm. apart (horizontal) and any watermarks not visible ; sturdy and fairly transluscent though thick, well-burnished to glossy with burnisher's marks visible ; staining and tide lines.", 'Decoration: Elegant headpiece at opening on p.6 consisting of rectangular piece carrying title in red and green, bordered in vegetal design of alternating green and red leaves, set off by palmette (ansa) ; section headings and keywords (mainly اللهم and محمد ) rubricated or in orange-red, green or yellow ink, varying by line ; textual dividers in the form of three red dots ; tailpieces at close of the first quarter (p.82), the first half (p.151), the third quarter (p.224) and close on p.296 ; final tailpiece consists of rectangular panel carrying title in black with yellow, red, and green accents, surrounded by a border in yellow with black geometric pattern and palmette cornerpieces and ansa (in green, yellow, red and black).', 'Script: Maghribī script ; an elegant hand with occasional very slight inclination to the left and swooping descenders.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page.', 'Collation: 11 VI (132), VI+3 (147) ; almost exclusively senions / sexternions ; p.175 left blank and marked (possibly by Yahuda) "بياض بالاصل والتعصيبة في قفاها" ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "على يد ... محمد بن علي بن ابي عبد الله الرابطي [؟] التلمساني ... غفر الله له ولوالديه ولمشايخه وازواجه وذرياته ولقرابته ولاخوانه المؤمنين والمؤمنات والمسلمين والمسلمات الاحياء منهم والاموات ... كمل كتاب تنبيه الانام وشفاء الاسقام في بيان علو مقام نبينا محمد عليه السلام والله الموفق وكان الفراغ من هذه الصلوات المباركة يوم السبت عند الضحى في اوائل شهر الله المعظم صفر عام ۱۰۴۷ [؟] عرفنا الله خيره وكفانا شره بجاه محمد صلى الله عليه وسلم"', 'Explicit: "يا رب العالمين وصل اللهم بجلالك وسلم وبارك على سيدنا ومولانا محمد خاتم النبيين وامام المرسلين وعلى اله الطيبين والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي زين سماء الاذكار بالصلاة على النبي المختار واطلع من سنا انوارها مطالع الشموس والاقمار ... وبعد فانه لما كانت الصلاة على النبي الاكرم والرسول المعظم صلى الله عليه وسلم ... وسميتها تنبيه الانام في بيان علو مقام نبينا محمد عليه افضل وازكى السلام وربما [؟] سميتها ايضا شفاء الاسقام ومحو الاثام في الصلاة على خير الانام ..."', 'Title from headpiece at opening on p.6 and tailpiece at colophon on p.296.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant Maghribī copy of a collection of prayers for the Prophet.'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Initials PP in roman; lion.', 'Contains astronomical diagrams.', 'Text overlined in red; substantial marginal notes in hand of copyist (same as that of Mich. Isl. Mss. 816,2-4).', 'Date in colophon: tammat fī 17 m[in] b[=Rajab?] sanat 1207 [i.e. 28 February? 1793].', 'For other copies of this text, see Mich. Isl. Mss. 754, 755, 805,4, and 817,1.', 'Pp. [1-98]. Bound with: [2] Short philosophical text, p. [99]; [3] Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad al-Fāzābādī, Commentary on a work on philosophical debate, p. [100]; [4] Treatise on astronomical measurements and surveying, pp. [102-226].', 'Commentary on al-Jighmīnī\'s Mulakhkhaṣ fī al-hayʾah, "a treatise on theoretical astronomy ... compiled in 618 H [i.e. 1221 or 2]." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 158.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 917', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.259, transcription completed 25 Ramaḍān 1356, corresponding to 28 November 1937 and 19 Hātūr [1654], likely in Egypt, and eventually bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 66', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "متن فصوص الحكم | ابن عربى | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper ; bifolium carrying pp.259-261 loose.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a medium to bold line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of inclination to the right, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 26 lines per page.', "Collation: Pages between sections intentionally left blank or partially blank (for 'title pages,' see pp.1, 17, 37, 57, 77, 97, 117, 137, 157, 177, 197, 217, 237, and 257) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تم في صبيحة ٢٥ رمضان ١٣٥٦ ٢٨ نوفمبر ١٩٣٧ ١٩ هاتور"', 'Explicit: "لا يسعه شيء لانه عين الاشياء وعين نفسه والشيء لا يقال فيه ان يسع نفسه ولا لا يسعها والله يقول الحق وهو يهدي السبيل تم "', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي انزل الحكم على قلوب الكلم باحدية الطريق الامم من المقام الاقدم ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy of Ibn ʻArabī's celebrated Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam, a collection of aphorisms summarizing the teaching of 28 prophets from Adam to Muḥammad. Leaves at the close of the codex (pp.263-267) carry text from Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam (section on Muḥammad / الفص المحمدي ) and may have been been misplaced when the manuscript was bound."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 600', 'Origin: As appears in scribal colophon on p.160, transcription completed finished the last day of Dhū al-Qaʻdah 1066 [ca. 19 September 1656]. As appears in preceding authorial colophon (also on p.160), composition completed 17 Rajab 979 [ca. 5 December 1571].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and label on lower cover "IL 345" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in purple and black mottled paper (sponge painted or faux marbled look) with black cloth over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves (upper flyleaf lost) in brown wove paper ; never sewn (no evidence of stations, etc.), most bifolia split ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, delamination of boards, cover detached from textblock, etc. ; ill-fitting and likely not original ; serves as wrapper for unsewn gatherings.', 'Support: European laid paper with 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 24-27 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark (parallel to chains, 90 mm. long, see pp.130-131, etc.) ; some inclusions and knots visible, well-burnished and sturdy ; much staining ; replacement leaf (pp.85-86) in a European laid paper with 6 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (vertical), and three crescents watermark (perpendicular to chains, 87 mm. long), light cream, far less soiled.', 'Decoration: Some keywords rubricated, others accented with red (over extended horizontal strokes) ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', "Script: Naskh ; clear, compact 'Syrian', Egyptian or Ḥijāzī hand [?] in a medium line ; virtually serifless with only very slight effect of tilt to the left, counters of initial and final hāʼ, ṣād, ṭāʼ, etc. mainly open, other counters closed, pointing in strokes as well as distinct and conjoined dots, some elongation of horizontal strokes, some free assimilation of letters ; replacement leaf (fol.46/pp.85-86) supplied in a different hand, a 'Syrian' or Ḥijāzī naskh partially seriffed with tilt to the left, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes, etc.", 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 8 V(80), i ; exclusively quinions ; most bifolia split (especially in the first five quires) ; quire numbering, initially in the form of whole words accompanied by collation note "بلغ مقابلة", then (from fourth quire on) in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals in the upper outer corner of the opening recto of each quire ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تم المعارج بحمد الله وعونه وحسن توفيقه وكان الفراغ من كتابته يوم الاربعاء المبارك سلخ شهر الله الحرام ذي القعدة من شهور سنة ست وستين والف من الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلاة والسلام ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم"', 'Explicit: "وقالوا مر رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم من هذا الطريق رواه ابو ليلى والبزار باسناد صحيح فنسأل الله تعالى ان يمدنا بمدد سيد المرسلين وان يجعلنا لاقواله وافعاله من المتبعين ... امين قال مؤلفه نفعنا الله تعالى به في الدنيا والاخرة وكان الفراغ من تكملته [نسخه] عشية نهار الاربعاء سابع عشر رجب الفرد سنة تسع وسبعين وتسعمائة احسن الله تقضيها وبارك لي في ايامها ولياليها جعل ذلك خالصا لوجه الكريم وموجبا للفوز بجنات النعيم امين قال الحافظ ابو الفضل بن حجر العسقلاني رحمه الله تعالى هنيئا لاصحاب خير الورى ... عسى الله يجمعنا كلنا برحمته معه في داره"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي رفع قدر نبينا محمد صلى الله عليه وسلم في الدنيا والاخرى واسرى به ليلا من المسجد الحرام الى المسجد الاقصى ... وبعد فقد قال الله تعالى في كتابه المبين وهو اصدق القائلين بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم سبحان الذي اسرى بعبده ليلا من المسجد الحرام الى المسجد الاقصى الذي باركنا حوله لنريه من اياتنا انه هو السميع البصير وسنتكلم ان شاء الله تعالى على بعض فوائد هذه الاية الكريمة وعلى فوائد بعض ايات من اول سورة والنجم ثم نورد حديث قصة الاسرى والمعراج ونتكلم على بعض فوائد ذلك ان شاء الله ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Well-annotated copy of the account of the miʻrāj, the Prophet's ascension to Heaven, by Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad al-Ghayṭī (d.1573)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 951', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.550, copied by al-Sayyid ʻIwaḍ al-Rashīdī (İvaz Reşidî) with transcription apparently completed Jumādá II 1271 [February-March 1855].', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 100', 'Binding: Boards (ill-trimmed and possibly recycled, see upper board under board lining stamped with "423 CLOCHETTE 2M" and star in circle below) covered in a floral-print textile (cretonne) ; Type III binding (without flap), tight back though with squares rather than boards cut flush with text block ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted European laid paper with three crescents (tre lune) watermark ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and pink ; overall in fair condition with some staining and abrasion, detaching at spine, etc. ; likely not original, traces of earlier spine lining (through which primaries have been sewn) visible.', 'Support: Machine wove paper, dark cream to beige in color, well-burnished ; some offset of ink and blocking, staining, and pest damage ; flyleaves and pastedowns in European laid paper with three crescents (tre lune) watermark.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; compact Turkish hand in a medium line ; serifless with effect of inclination to the right, slight effect of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), some elongation of horizontal strokes and sweeping descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: ii, 27 V(270), II (274), v (ternion with final leaf pasted down) ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and mistakenly skips two pages between pp.435-436).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "وقد وقع الفراغ من تحريره يوم الاثنين [؟] من جمادى الاخر سنة الف ومائة واثنين وستين بعون الله ومنه تم بقلم الفقير اليه سبحانه السيد عوض الرشيدي في جمادى الثانية سنة الف ومائتين وواحد وسبعين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم تسليما كثيرا الى يوم الدين م"', 'Explicit: "وقد مر ذلك ولو ذكرت احرف الجر ودخول بعضها على بعض لجاء من ذلك امثلة كثيرة وهذا اخر ما تيسر ايراده في هذا التعليق اسأل الله الذي من علي بانشائه واتمامه ... ان يحرم وجهي النار ... انه حكيم كريم رؤوف رحيم"', 'Incipit: اما بعد حمدا لله تعالى على افضاله والصلوة ... فان اولى ما تقترحه القرائح واعلى ما تجنح الى تحصيله الجوانح [ما يتيسر] به فهم كتاب الله المنزل ويتضح به معنى حديث [نبيه المرسل] ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.5).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of Ibn Hishām’s (d.761/1360) celebrated treatise on Arabic syntax, arranged by particle.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 958', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. suggest mid to late 18th century (see Walz, "The Paper trade of Egypt and the Sudan," 83-84. Replacement leaves likely late 19th or even early 20th century.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 107', 'Binding: Boards covered in textured black cloth (repeating vegetal pattern) with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "شرح السنوسي للمقدمة" ; sewn in white thread over three recessed cords ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: European laid paper of at least two "raisin" types, both appearing in some quires ; opening type with 11-12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of grapes (raisin) under cartouche and crown (see pp.8, 12, 16, 18, etc.), sturdy and well-burnished, dark cream to beige in color, minor ink burn ; other type with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 18-20 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of grapes (raisin) under cartouche with "C D..." and crown above (see pp.92, 104, etc.), sturdy and well-burnished, cream in color ; replacement sections on leaves of machine wove paper, well-burnished to glossy, light brown in color.', 'Decoration: Keywords, abbreviation symbols (mainly sigla and two-teeth stroke overlining keywords) rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, spacious Egyptian hand in a medium line ; serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, pointing in distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah usually pointed as yāʼ ; replacement sections (pp.161-184, 285-290) supplied in a different hand, larger, bolder and more carefully executed.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 8 V(80), VI (92), 5 V(142), I+1 (145), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "وفي قبورنا ويوم يبعث الله تعالى لفصل القضاء جميع الانام وهذا آخر ما قيدناه على المقدمات نسأله سبحانه وتعالى ان ينفع بها وبشرحها الواضع والمتسبب والقرائ والكاتب والناظر والمعلم والمتعلم في الحياة وبعد الممات ... وآخر دعواهم ان الحمد لله رب العالمين تمت بحمد الله وعون وحسن توفيقه والحمد لله وحده وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم م"', 'Incipit: "قال الشيخ الفقيه الامام الصالح سيدي ابو عبد الله محمد بن يوسف السنوسي ... الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام على سيدنا محمد خاتم النبيين ... وبعد فهذه كلمات قصدت بها شرح ما وضعته من المقدمة على سبيل الاختصار ..."', "Title from 'title page' inscription on p.1.", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Abū ʻAbd Allāh Muḥammad ibn Yūsuf al-Sanūsī's (d.1490) commentary on one of his brief treatises on the essentials of faith, al-Muqaddimah."])

en: (count: ['Contains astronomical tables and diagrams.', 'Text and tables rubricated in red, brown, green, purple, and blue; corrections in hand of copyist.', 'Date and name of copyist in colophon: tamma nashkhihi ʻalayad al-faqīr li-raḥmat rabb al-nās ʻAbduh Khalīl al-Naḥḥās ... fī Jumād awwal sanat 1306 [January 1889].', '"Commentary [on a zīj for Cairo] compiled in 1239 H [1823]." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 116.', '"Commentary on al-Lumʻa fī ḥall al-sabʻa, an abridgment by Shihāb al-Dīn Aḥmad ibn Ghulām Allāh ibn Aḥmad al-Kūm al-Rīshī, (d. 838/1432) of his own Nuzhat al-nāẓir fī talkhīs zīj ibn al-Shāṭir, which is in turn an abridgement of al-Zīj, the astronomical tables of ʻAlāʾ al-Dīn ʻAlī ibn Ibrāhīm ibn Muḥammad ibn al-Shāṭir (d. 777/1375)...." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Eagle with FAG in roman; one crescent; three crescents. For the latter see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Contains mathematical tables and diagrams.', 'Text rubricated; overlining in black and red; marginal notes, diagrams, and corrections in hand of copyist (same as that of Mich. Isl. Ms. 802,2); kurrāsahs 3-10 numbered.', "Date and copyist's name in colophon: wa-qad wāfaqa al-farāgh min naql hādhihi al-nusakh yawm al-aḥad al-mubārak thānī yawm maḍá min shahr Shaʻbān ʻām khamsah wa-thalāthīn wa-miʾatayn baʻd al-alf [i.e. 15 May 1820] ʻalá yad al-ʻabd al-faqīr al-fānī Muṣṭafá Muḥammad ʻArafah al-Dissūqī al-Burhānī.", 'Text (not this copy) published.', 'Pp. [1-185]. Bound with: Sālim ibn Sālim al-Qayrawānī, Hādiyat al-bādī li-kitāb al-Qalaṣādī, pp. [189-262].', "Ibn Ghāzī's Munyat al-ḥussāb is based on the Kitāb talkhīṣ aʻmāl al-ḥisāb of Ibn al-Bannāʾ. See David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), pp. 139 and 141-142.", '"The author\'s commentary on his own poem on arithmetic entitled Munyat al-ḥussāb." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 74', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.192a, copied by Khalīl ibn Ḥusayn ibn Khalīl ibn Muḥammad ibn Ḥasan. Transcription finished ("qad waqaʻat istirāḥat al-qalam min taswīd hādhā al-kitāb...") in the latter part of Rabīʻ I 1174 H / October 1760.', 'Accompanying materials: Ottoman stamp tucked in between fol.96 and 97 (Western pagination).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 151. Commentary on Tuhfat al-muluk."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather and worn marbled paper ; once Type II binding (with flap) though flap is now missing (leather burn staining from envelope flap on opening leaf) ; board linings in paper, hinges in lime green silk ; upper and lower covers carry traces of blind-stamped decoration (now obliterated) including central mandorla and cornerpiece, off-center as board was cut down to fit this text block (recycled covers) ; very worn and in poor condition ; repair to upper joint in green textile.', 'Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of crossbow (arbalète, see p.6, 8, etc.) and three small hats (tre cappelli, see p.10, etc.), thin and crisp though quite sturdy, bright cream in color, well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with chapter headings, overlining, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; Turkish hand in a medium to bold line ; virtually serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline and of inclination to the left, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes, point of final nūn fully encircled by bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; impression of ruling-board evident.', 'Collation: 18 V (180), VI (192) ; quaternions followed by a sexternion ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals skipping leaf between ٥٥ and ٥٦ ; catchwords present ; pagination added later in pencil, Western numerals.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "قد وقعت استراحة القلم من تسويد هذا الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب في يد اضعف الطلاب حين انخراط سلك الطلاب خليل بن حسين بن خليل بن خليل [?] بن محمد بن حسن غفر الله له ولوالدي واحسن اليهم واليه في بلدة ارض روم في مدرسة رضائية في محلة يكن احمد اغا في شهر عشر الآخر من ربيع الاول في يوم جار شنبة بين الظهر والعصر سنة اربعة وسبعين ومائة بعد الالف من هجرة النبي المصطفى صلى الله عليه وعلى جميع الانبياء والمرسلين والحمد لله رب العالمين وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين سنة ١١٧٤"', 'Explicit: "فان كان الوارث واحدا من اصحاب الفروض النبي اخذ كل المال بالرد لا بالفرض ثم مسائل اربعة اقسام فليطلب في المطولات"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعل قلوب العلماء [مرايا] جمال معاني الهداية..."', 'Title from opening.', 'Ms. codex.', "Commentary by Abū al-Layth al-Muḥarram ibn Muḥammad ibn al-ʻĀrif al-Zīʻlī (al-Zaylāʻī) on Tuḥfat al-mulūk, al-Rāzī's treatise on Ḥanafī law. Includes many comments and reading notes in margins and at front with excerpts from other works including Kitāb al-waṣāyā and Manāqib al-Imām al-aʻẓam Abī Ḥanīfah. Also includes table of contents."])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated; illuminated ʻunwān on p. [1]; text enclosed within red borders; extensive marginal notes; small inserted leaves.', 'Date in colophon.', '"Commentary on Surahs 78-114 of the Koran." Cataloging by William Hoyt Worrell, 1925. These sūrahs are section 30 of the Koran, the last of the sections [juzʼ] into which it is divided.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 369', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "۱٦٨" from label affixed to upper cover ; "341 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in quite dark brown (to black) leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in yellow-tinted silver-flecked paper, flyleaves in untinted silver-flecked paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped (with orange recessed onlays, gold-painted) scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. NSd 7), pendants and cornerpieces, with tooled rosette and gold-painted accents as well as tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps evoking guilloché roll ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn in blue-green thread, two stations ; overall in poor condition with upper cover fully detached, spine split through in several places, endbands virtually gone (only small section of core and primaries remains at tail), abrasion and losses of media, lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper mainly with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27-28 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of grapes (raisin) under crown (see p.4, 8, 10, 30, 250, etc.) and "DE IZERON" (see p.6, 16, etc.), crisp and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished ; flyleaves in another European laid paper with 6 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 22-23 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark ; some staining.', 'Decoration: Keywords, headings and some abbreviation symbols (mainly signes de renvoi), marginalia and vocalization rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; occasional overlining in red ; written area surrounded by a heavy copper colored frame defined by black fillets and outermost red rule.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; clear Turkish hand ; serifless with slight inclination to the left, elongation of horizontal strokes, many closed counters, pointing in conjoined dots ; opening (p.2) and pp.19-20 supplied in another nastaʻlīq (talik), serifless, with inclination to the right and slight effect of words descending to baseline, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 15 V(150), II (154), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "طلب دعاء اجابت قرين وجناب ستار العيوبدن در يوزۀ بهرۀ واجعل لى لسان صدق في الاخرين در رباعيه ... در عيب نظر مكن كه بى عيب خداست تمت م م م"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذى نزل احسن الحديث ومن اصدق من الله حديثا ... اما بعد وقتا كه نظم بو ضعيف ومقصر ومكتر اوقجى زاده محمد افقر ... و بعد توفيق الاتمام بو مجموعه براعت اتسام احسن الحديث اسمى ايله وسم اولنمق ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.6.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the elegant versification with prose commentary of forty ḥadīth by Okçuzade Mehmet Şahî Bey (d.1629).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 247', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon but cover, paper and hand suggest roughly 15th century.', 'Binding: Heavy pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in orange paint with geometric stamped pattern in blue and red ; doublure hinges in shell marbled paper in pink and blue ; upper and lower covers carry large incised and gold-painted scalloped mandorla (filled with floral design or geometric design) with pendants in the form of three sepaled calyxes, corner pieces and elaborate tooled border ; likely 15th century (compare Chester Beatty MS 3571 in Bosch, Carswell, & Petherbridge, no. 67 p.184) ; sewn in black (or very dark blue) thread, two sewing stations ; in fair condition with some minor abrasion and severe negative draw (warping) of both upper and lower cover as well as envelope flap.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with chain lines in groups of three, roughly 9-10 mm. between the chain lines and 58-60 mm. between the groups (see p.42 etc.) ; laid lines spaced roughly 20 laid lines in 20-21 mm. ; sturdy, burnished, with many inclusions and whole fibers visible within sheet ; front flyleaf in European laid paper with anchor (in circle with trefoil above) watermark (likely 16th or early 17th century, compare Heawood 1 and 2).', 'Decoration: Illuminated titlepiece on fol.1a (p.3) in gold and blue consisting of two rectangular panels (bearing title in white with gold outline on field of blue) separated by a medallion filled with floral design ; accents consisting of gold flowers on fields of blue fill the remainder of the piece, with borders of black dashes on white bands ; ansae in the form of roundels accompany the rectangular panels and a semi circular piece sets off the medallion ; on fol.1b (p.4) illuminated rectangular panel carries opening following the basmalah ; textual dividers in the form of gold rosettes with blue accents ; throughout, written area bordered in frame consisting of gold band outlined by black fillets with outermost blue fillet ; text partly chrysographed with headings, keywords, etc. in gold and partly rubricated with keywords in red ; other keywords and headings appear in blue.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Mamlūk Syrian or Egyptian hand ; bold and stiff ; sans serif ; the lām alif al-warrāqīyah preferred ; mainly open counters ; fully vocalized ; some headings in script approaching muḥaqqaq, seriffed.', 'Layout: Written in 5 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, III+2 (8), 6 V (68), V+2 (80) ; chiefly quinions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of al-khamsah al-ghubīrīyah appearing on the upper part of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil (supplied during digitization, numbers flyleaves).', 'Explicit: [1] فهذه الاسما هي التي استخرجها سفيان وغيره من القرآن العظيم لكنها اذا عدت كانت ماية اسم غير اني وجدت منها اسما واحدا مكررا وهو خبير ذكر مرة في آل عمران ومرة في الانعام فلهذا كانت ماية تمت اسماء الله الحسنى. [2] كذا رواه النسائي والاحاديث المذكورة كلها من صحيح مسلم والبخاري تم الكتاب المبارك والحمد لله وحده وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل.', 'Incipit: [1] قال الله تبارك وتعالى ولله الاسماء الحسنى فادعوه بها ... [2] قال الشيخ الامام العالم الحافظ ضيا الدين ابو عبد الله محمد بن احمد بن عبد الواحد ابن احمد بن عبد الرحمن المقدسي ... الحمد لله حمدا يوافي نعمه ويكافي مزيده ... اما بعد فان بعض اخواني سألني مرة بعد اخرى ان اجمع كتابا في الطب مما صح عن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم وما روى من ذلك في الكتب المشهورة فاجبته الى مسألته ورايت ان ابتدئ باحاديث الكفارات وان الامراض لرفع الدرجات ومحو السيئات ذكر خيرة الله تعالى للعبد فيما ابتداه اخبرنا ..."', 'Title from titlepiece on fol.1a (p.3).', 'Ms. codex.', '3. fol.80a-80b : [blank].', '2. fol.13a-fol.79b : Kitāb al-Ṭibb al-nabawī / Ḍiyāʼ al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad ibn ʻAbd al-Wāḥid al-Maqdisī.', '1. fol.1a-13a : al-Asmāʼ al-ḥusná mustakhrajah min al-Qurʼān al-ʻaẓīm.', "A work on prophetic medicine (or the Prophet's medicine) by al-Maqdisī (d.1245) preceded by a short treatise of uncertain authorship on the beautiful names of God."])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated in three colors: red, green, and yellow(?).', 'Date based on discussion in text.', 'On astrology; specifically, the portents for historical events in 1037 A.H. and the arrival of a "great man" from Egypt; copy defective: text missing between pp. [18-21] (blank folio) and [28-29].'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Anchor in circle; hand; hand(?) in circle. For the first see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), nos. 5-8.', 'Contains astronomical tables and sundial diagrams.', 'Text rubricated; pp. [7-14] supplied on different paper in different hand; vol. has edge title; on p. [1], note in handwriting of an owner: khaṭṭ Fariskūrī tilmīdh Taqī al-Dīn al-Rāṣid.', '"A treatise on sundial theory with extensive tables for Cairo, compiled in 829 H [1425].... Merits investigation." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 75. Said in introduction to be based on Shifāʾ al-asqām fī waḍʻ al-sāʻāt ʻalá al-rukhām by Shihāb al-Dīn Aḥmad ibn ʻUmar al-Ṣūfī.'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Three crescents; Andrea Galvani of Pordenone; BLACON(?) in roman; AFFE(?) in roman. For the first two see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), pp. 24 and 36 and no. 860.', 'Text and tables rubricated.', 'Date in pencil on back flyleaf in a different hand: 1210 hijrī fī yawm al-khamīs.', 'Astronomical tables for the latitude of 41⁰ (Istanbul), with brief instructions for their use.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Andrea Galvani of Pordenone. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 36 and no. 860.', 'Text rubricated; marginal corrections and notes in hand of copyist.', "Date and copyist's name in colophon: tamma al-kitābah bi-ʻawn al-malik al-wahhāb ʻalá yad al-faqīr ʻAbd al-Fattāḥ Aḥmad Ṣiwān al-Liqāʾī[?] fī yawm al-thulāthā li-sabʻ ...[?]... min shahr al-Muḥarram sanat 1259 [7? February 1843].", 'In a muqaddimah and 20 bābs, on the "complete" quadrant. Text almost identical with that of Mich. Isl. Ms. 748 through the second bāb, after which the texts diverge; also similar, but not identical, to the text of Mich. Isl. Mss. 796,10 and 835,10, although they share similar titles.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1001', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.164, copied by al-Sayyid Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj ʻUmar al-Afandī al-Rifāʻī al-Shāfiʻī apparently in Kafr Takhārīm where he was then residing with transcription completed 17 Jumādá II 1276 [ca. 11 January 1860]. As appears in preceding authorial colophon (also on p.164), composition completed in Shawwāl 1229 [September-October 1814].', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 150', 'Binding: Boards covered in black textured cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "حاشية البردة" ; now sewn in white thread, five stations ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion and pest damage.', 'Support: European laid paper of two types ; opening type (through p.40) with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-28 mm. apart (horizontal), three crescents / tre lune watermark (65 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see pp.6, 10, 12, etc.) and countermark with letters R C F visible (see pp.4, 8, 12, 20, 22, 34, etc.), sturdy, cream to buff in color, lightly burnished ; from p.41 to close, a type with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27 mm. apart (horizontal), three crescents / tre lune watermark (75 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see pp.46, 50, 56, etc.) and countermark "Fi PALAZZUOLI" (see pp.46, 52, 54, 58, 60, 90, 166, etc. and compare Vollers O883, Universitätsbibliothek Leipzig), sturdy, cream to buff in color, lightly burnished.', 'Script: Naskh ; compact, somewhat angular Syrian hand in a medium line ; partially though irregularly seriffed (mainly serifless) with effect of tilt to the left, slight effect of words descending to baseline, free assimilation of letters and dots, pointing mainly in conjoined dots, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 8 V(80), II (84), i ; quinions with closing binion ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly repeats p.124 and p.138).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "قد تمت ونجزت هذه الحاشية المباركة لشيخنا الشيخ ابراهيم الباجوري امدنا الله تعالى بمدده ونفعنا بعلومه وحشرنا في زمرته على يد كاتبها الفقير الى رحمة ربه المعيد المبدي السيد محمد بن المرحوم الحاج عمر الافندي القاطن يومئذ بقصبة كفرخاريم الرفاعي نسبا والشافعي مذهبا غفر الله له ولوالديه ولمشايخه ولاسلافه جري وحرر في سبعة عشر يوم خلت من جمادى الثاني سنه ١٢٧٦ من هجرته صلى الله عليه وسلم م"', 'Explicit: "بجاه من بيته في طيبة حرم واسمه قسم من اعظم القسم وهذه بردة المختار قد ختمت والحمد لله في بدء وفي ختم ابياتها قد اتت ستين مع مائة فرج بها كربنا يا واسع الكرم فرج الله الكرب عنا وعن سائر المسلمين بجاه سيد المرسلين ... والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "حمدا لمن شرح بمدح نبيه قلوب اوليائه ووشحهم ببردة محاسنه وطيب سنائة ... اما بعد فيقول راجي عفو ربه الكريم عبده الباجوري ابراهيم اعلم ان مدحه صلى الله عليه وسلم لم يتعاطه فحول الشعراء المتقدمين لان كمالاته صلى الله عليه وسلم لا تحصى ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of the commentary by al-Shaykh Ibrāhīm al-Bājūrī (d.1860) on al-Būṣīrī’s celebrated poem in praise of the Prophet, al-Kawākib al-durrīyah fī madḥ khayr al-barīyah more commonly known as al-Burdah.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1004', 'Origin: As appears in authorial colophon on p.248, composition completed 1 Shaʻbān 1170 [ca. 21 April 1757] (compare close of al-Maktabah al-Bārūnīyah no. 50.220). Date of copying is not specified, though paper, hand, etc. suggest ca. 1771, not long after composition.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 153', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark blue textured cloth with dark blue leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "حاشية الحفني" ; sewn in white thread over three recessed cords ; overall in good condition.', 'Support: European laid paper with 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents / tre lune watermark with P (roughly 105 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see pp.16, 22, 24, 40, 42, etc. and compare no.769 / dated 1771 in Velkov and Andreev, Filigranes dans les documents ottomans. I Trois croissants), quite sturdy, cream to buff in color, well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas and stylized florets (or v-signs, resembling fleurs de lis or crosses at times) in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; careful, clear Egyptian hand in a medium line ; partially seriffed with long serif on occasional alif, slight effect of tilt to the right, curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in strokes or conjoined dots, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ ; two replacement leaves at opening (pp.1-4) in a different hand (with final yāʼ usually unpointed).', 'Layout: Written mainly in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 6 (6), V-1 (15), V (25), V-1 (34), 3 V(64), V-1 (73), 4 V(113), VI-1 (124), i ; almost exclusively quinions (with many anomalous) with final senion ; missing most of first and second gatherings though two replacement leaves for opening matter have been supplied (see pp.1-4), followed by a misplaced leaf from the final gathering (carrying pp.5-6, p.6 should follow p.246 and p.247 should follow p.5) and the opening three leaves of the second gathering (pp.7-12) bound in backwards and in reverse order ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals under letter kāf in upper outer corner of recto of opening leaf of each quire ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Authorial," reads "وكان الفراغ من تعليقها يوم الاربعاء غرة شهر شعبان سنة سبعين ومائة والف من هجرة اشرف المرسلين عليه افضل الصلاة والسلام واسأل الله من فضله حسن الختام ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم تم"', 'Explicit: "انقطاع كما سبق له قريبا وهذا آخر ما من به الملك الوهاب واليه سبحانه وتعالى المرجع والمآب نسأله من فضله يجعلها هداية نافعة لكل قلب منيب كاشفة ظلمات الاوهام عن كل صب مصيب والحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام على خاتم المرسلين ... وعلى اله واصحابه وازواجه واحبابه"', 'Incipit: "قال قرة عيون اعيان العارفين وغرة جباه وجوه وجوه [كذا] العارفين ملاذ من الى جنابه التجا ومعاذ كل ملهوف منقطع الرجاء ... سيدي محمد الحفناوي متع الله بوجوده الوجود ... بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم حمدا لمن جعل احبابه ادلاء على سبيل الهداية وامدهم بلوامع الانوار وسواطع الاسرار ... وبعد فيقول فقير المغني عبد مولاه محمد الحفني هذه حواش تفوق نفائس الدرر على شرح الهمزية للعلامة الشهاب ابن حجر ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine though partly acephalous copy of the gloss by Muḥammad al-Ḥifnāwī (al-Ḥifnī, d.1767 or 8) on the commentary by Shihāb al-Dīn Aḥmad Ibn Ḥajar al-Haytamī (d.1567) on al-Būṣīrī's (d.1296?) poem in praise of the Prophet entitled al-Qaṣīdah al-hamzīyah fī madḥ al-nabawīyah."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 937', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.60, copied by the anonymous "ا ع" (compare Isl. Mss. 905, 910, 929, 981, 988, 998) with transcription completed 4 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1352 [ca. 20 March 1934]. Likely copied in Egypt and eventually bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 86', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "رسالة العرشية | صدر الدين | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine, but appears to be in heavy white thread over perhaps four stations (see p.50) ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Wove paper of two types (trimmed to different sizes), both quite sturdy, one lined and beige in color (opening through p.40), the other unlined and cream in color (p.41 to close).', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; compact hand in a medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with slight effect of tilt to the right, mainly closed counters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 25-27 lines per page.', 'Collation: i,2 V(20), V+1 (31), i (as suggested by gatherings, sewing difficult to examine) ; chiefly quinions ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals accompanied by letter kāf (ك) appearing on the opening recto of each gathering from the second (see pp.21, 41) ; pagination in pencil, Hindu-Arabic numerals (through page ٤٤) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly repeats pp.58-59).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "كتبه الفاني اع في الثلاثاء رابع ذي الحجة ١٣٥٢"', 'Explicit: "على الظن والتخمين والاماني والخيال اعاذنا الله واخواننا الذين يؤمنون من شر الشياطين والمضلين ... انه سميع الدعاء وقريب مجيب وبالاجاء جدير وبالهداية الى اقوم سبيل ... آمين آمين آمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعلنا ممن شرح صدره للاسلام فهو على نور من ربه ... اما بعد فيقول العبد الذليل المحتاج الى عفو الرب الجليل محمد المدعو بصدر الدين ... هذه رسالة اذكر فيها طائفة من المسائل الربوبية ..."', 'Title from heading on incipit page (p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of al-Ḥikmah al-ʻarshīyah, the popular work on knowledge of God and eschatology by Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī (d.1640), renowned philosopher of the Ṣafavid period.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 906', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.162, transcription completed 19 Dhū al-Qaʻdah [13]55, corresponding to the 1st of February [19]37 and the 24th of Ṭūbah [1653].', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 55', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title, author and owner, as well as decorative accents over raised bands "مجموعة ابي نصر الفارابي | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine but appears to be over cords, in white thread, five stations ; stuck-on endbands ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact, modern hand in a medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 26 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 20 II(81), i ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals surmounted by kāf appears on the opening recto of each of the first three quires ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "وكان الفراغ من تسويد هذه الرسالة في يوم الاثنين الموافق ١٩ من ذي القعدة ٥٥ وغرة فبراير س ٣٧ ق ٢٤ طوبة"', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', '10. p.85-p.162 : al-Risālah al-tāsiʻah min al-rasāʼil al-Fārābīyah hiya al-risālah al-maʻrūfah bi-Ārāʼ ahl al-madīnah al-fāḍilah wa-hiya fī al-aṣl al-Risālah al-Aflāṭūnīyah al-shahīrah bi-Jumhūrīyat Aflāṭun / al-Fārābī.', '9. p.83-p.85 : Min al-Risālah al-thāminah wa-hiya Nukat Abī Naṣr fīmā yaṣiḥḥu wa mā lā yaṣṣiḥu min aḥkām al-nujūm / al-Fārābī.', '8. p.79-p.83 : Min al-Risālah al-sābiʻah fī masāʼil wa-ajwabatihā / al-Fārābī.', '7. p.62-p.79 : al-Risālah al-sādisah min al-thamāniyah Risālat al-Fuṣūṣ/ al-Fārābī.', '6. p.48-62 : al-Risālah al-khāmisah min al-thamāniyah ʻUyūn al-masāʼil / al-Fārābī.', '5. p.41-p.48 : al-Risālah al-rābiʻah min al-thamāniyah fīmā yanbaghī an yuqaddam qabla taʻallum al-falsafah / al-Fārābī.', '4. p.33-p.41 : al-Risālah al-thālithah min al-thamāniyah fī maʻānī al-ʻaql / al-Fārābī.', '3. p.30-33 : al-Risālah al-thānīyah min al-thamāniyah Maqālah sharīfah lil-muʻallim al-thānī Abī Naṣr al-Fārābī fī aghrāḍ al-muʻallim al-awwal fī kull maqālah min maqālāt Kitāb Mā baʻd al-ṭabīʻah al-mawsūm bi-al-Ḥurūf / al-Fārābī.', '2. p.3-p.29 : al-Risālah al-ūlá fī al-jamʻ bayna al-raʼyayn / al-Fārābī.', '1. p.1-p.2 : [preface].', 'Careful copy of a collection (majmūʻah) of works by the renowned Muslim philosopher, Abū Naṣr Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad ibn Tarkhān al-Fārābī, referred to as Alfarabius or Avennasar in Latin texts, known as "the second teacher" (المعلم الثاني), the first being Aristotle.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 976', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and eventually bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 125', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "مجموعة شذرة تاريخية ورسائل | J.H.D." ; sewn in heavy white thread, seemingly in four stations ; overall in fairly good condition with minor curvature in boards (negative draw in upper board, positive draw in lower board).', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper.', 'Decoration: Occasional overlining, headings and glosses (including signes de renvoi) rubricated.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact, elegant hand in a thin to medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 19 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, XIV (28), i ; a single gathering of fourteen bifola ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Incipit: [Shadhrah tārīkhīyah] "مقدمة في علم التاريخ وفائدته واقامه التاريخ علم يتضمن ذكر الوقائع ولا سيما ما كان منها متعلقا بالامم والاقاليم مع تعيين اوقاتها وبيان اسبابها ومسبباتها ..." ; [Risālat al-Nuqtah ] "الحمد لله الذي ظهر بما شاء لمن شاء بمشيئته الازلية ... اما بعد فلما شاع بين اهل العلوم ان ارفع العلوم واشرفها علم التوحيد ..." ; [Risālat al-Ajwibah al-Ṣadrīyah ʻan al-asʼilah al-Naṣīrīyah al-Khusrawīyah ] "الحمد لمنور النفوس بانوار العلم والقرآن وهادي الخلائق بارسال الرسول وانزال القرآن ... وبعد فان الحكيم ... نصير الملة والدين محمد الطوسي ... قد بعث رسالة الى بعض معاصريه وهو الفاضل ... شمس الدين الخسرو شاهي ..." ; [Risālat al-Ajwibah al-Ṣadrīyah ʻan al-masāʼil al-Jīlānīyah] "هذه رسالة كتبها الاستاذ صدر الافاضل الى الفاضل مولانا الشمس الجيلاني ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', '5. p.42-p.55 : Risālat al-Ajwibah al-Ṣadrīyah ʻan al-masāʼil al-Jīlānīyah / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Shīrāzī.', '4. p.29-p.41 : Risālat al-Ajwibah al-Ṣadrīyah ʻan al-asʼilah al-Naṣīrīyah al-Khusrawīyah / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Shīrāzī.', '3. p.22-p.28 : Risālat al-Nuqtah / lil-Ṣadr ayḍan [ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad al-Hamadhānī].', '2. p.21 : [blank].', '1. p.2-p.20 : Shadhrah tārīkhīyah.', 'Careful copy of a collection (majmūʻah) of works opening with an excerpt on history followed by Asrār al-nuqṭah of Sayyid ʻAlī Hamadānī (d.1385) (here attributed to Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī) and two philosophical works by Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī (d.1640).'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Three crescents. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Text rubricated and vocalized; lines of each section beginning on p. [8] numbered; text enclosed in red borders; marginal notes in another (?) hand.', "Date based on owner's mark on p. [1].", 'On the characteristics of calendars in the Coptic, Byzantine, and Islamic systems, the astrological import of their days, and weather conditions for crops on those days.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 922', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974). Copy perhaps partly made from a printed edition.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 71', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "اسرار الآيات | الشيرازي | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Wove paper of two distinct types, one lined and one unlined.', 'Decoration: Many opening headings and passages executed in contrasting purple ink ; others simply larger and bolded.', 'Script: Naskh and ruqʻah ; two or three modern hands in a medium to bold line ; naskh partially but irregularly seriffed with slight effect of inclination to the left, curvilinear descenders, open and closed counters, words adhering to baseline, some elongation of horizontal strokes, occasionally more carefully executed ; ruqʻah, compact hand with slight effect of inclination to the right, serifless and freely ligatured with pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 21-25 lines per page.', 'Collation: Pages between some sections left blank (see pp.37-40, 71-71) ; pagination in pencil, Hindu-Arabic numerals (first sixteen pages only) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: [Asrār al-āyāt] "Scribal," reads "تمت هذه النسخة الشريفة المسماه باسرار الآيات وانوار البينات للمحقق القويم صدر الدين الشيرازي الشهير وسوف نتبعها ان شاء الله تع بمتن العرشية ومتن المشاعر"', 'Incipit: [preface] "نحمدك اللهم يا من تحيرت [؟] في بيداء كبريائه الالباب وغرقت في بحار معرفته عقول الاولياء ... وبعد فان هذا الكتاب المستطاب الذي هو قرة عيون اولى الالباب الموسوم باسرار الآيات وانوار البينات من مصنفات الحكيم الكامل ... صدر الحق والملة والدين محمد بن ابراهيم الشهير بصدر المتالهين الشيرازي ..." [Asrār al-āyāt] "هذا كتاب اسرار الآيات وانوار البينات لامام المتألهين محمد المعروف بصدر المتألهين الشيرازي طاب ثراه بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم ... نحمدك اللهم يا من بيده ملكوت الارض والسماء واليه تتشوق الكائنات ... اما بعد فيقول انزل خلق الله واحوجهم الى كرامة رب العالمين محمد المدعو بصدر الدين هذا بيان للناس وهدى ورحمة للمتقين ..." [Kitāb al-Mashāʻir] "نحمد الله ونستعين بقوته التي اقام بها ملكوت الارض والسماء وبكلمته التي انشأ بها نشأتي الآخرة والاولى على تهذيب القوى القابلة للاستكمال ... وبعد فان اقل الخلائق قدرا وجرما واكثرهم خطأ وجرما محمد الشتهر بصدر الدين الشيرازي يقول ايها الاخوان السالكون الى الله بنور العرفان ..." [al-ʻArshīyah] "الحمد لله الذي جعلنا ممن شرح صدره بالاسلام فهو على نور من ربه ... اما بعد فيقول العبد الذليل المحتاج الى عفو الرب الجليل ... هذه رسالة اذكر فيها طائفة من المسائل الربوبية ..."', 'Title from preface on p.1 and heading preceding opening on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', '3. p.326-p.425 : Matn al-ʻArshīyah / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Shīrāzī.', '2. p.268-p.326 : Kitāb al-Mashāʻir / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Shīrāzī.', '1. p.2-p.267 : Asrār al-āyāt wa-anwār al-bayyināt / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Shīrāzī.', 'Careful copy of the treatise on Qurʼān interpretation by the renowned Ṣafavid philosopher Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī (d.1640), followed by his Kitāb al-Mashāʻir, on ontology, and al-Ḥikmah al-ʻarshīyah, the popular work on knowledge of God and eschatology.'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Three crescents; crown surmounted by 6-pointed star and crescent. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24 and no. 1132.', 'Contains astronomical tables.', "Text and tables rubricated and ruled in red; text partially vocalized; copyist's name in colophon: min kitābat al-ʻabd al-faqīr ... Muṣṭafá al-Ābār; marginal corrections in a different hand; on verso of f. 7 a sheet containing tables in a modern hand has been pasted over the original text, some tables apparently missing (description by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945).", 'For an earlier (?), more complete (?) copy of this work see Mich. Isl. Ms. 734.', 'Text (not this copy) published.', 'Includes tables for Islamic years 1189 [1775 or 6] to 1219 [1804 or 5], upon which the 18th-cent. date for this item is based.', '"Prayer-tables for Cairo taken from the main corpus [compiled by Ibn Yūnus] ... preceded by a short introduction in 8 or 10 faṣls, simple calendrical tables, and a solar longitude table, and followed by a star catalog." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 91.'])

en: (count: ['Pp. [1-2] have thin triple borders in black and red with gold ink; remainder of text rubricated with red borders; wide margins with embossed diagonal rules provided for commentary; copyist same as that of Mich. Isl. Mss. 805,2-4.', "Date and copyist's name in colophon: wa-qad tamma ʻan yad aḍʻaf al-ʻibād al-sayyid Aḥmad al-Ḥamdī ibn Muḥammad ibn Amr Allāh al-ʻAlāʾī sanat khams wa-thamānīn wa-miʾatayn baʻd al-alf fī al-yawm al-khāmis ʻashar min Rajab [i.e. 1 November 1868].", 'Text (not this copy) published.', 'Pp. [1-12]. Bound with: [2] Muḥammad ibn Asʻad Jalāl al-Dawwānī, commentary on al-Zawrāʾ, pp. [13-34]; [3] same author, Khuṭbat a-zawrāʾ, pp. [35-39]; [4] Mūsá ibn Muḥammad Qāḍī Zādah, Sharḥ al-mulakhkhaṣ, pp. [40-212].', 'Essay on philosophy and mysticism.'])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated; copyist same as that of Mich. Isl. Ms. 691,2; diagrams and marginal notes in a different hand.', 'Date in colophon: alf wa-miyah wa-ithnayn wa-thalāthīn Dhū al-Ḥijjah [October-November 1720].', 'Pp. [1-47]. Bound with: ʻAbd al-Laṭīf ibn Aḥmad al-Dimishqī, Sharḥ urjūzah fī ḥall al-ʻadad, pp. [48-53].', "Dimishqī's commentary on his own poem Nukhbat al-tuffāḥah, based on Abū al-Ḥasan Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad al-Ashʻarī's poem al-Tuffāḥah fī ʻilm al-misāḥah, on surveying. For a later copy of this text, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 796,12."])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Three crescents; hillock. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24 and nos. 2610-2616.', 'Contains mathematical tables.', 'Text rubricated; marginal notes and corrections by copyist and others.', 'For another copy of this text, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 795,2.', 'Pp. [31-33] contain Risālah āfāqīyah fī al-ʻamal bi-al-nisbah al-sittīnīyah.', "Ibn al-Majdī's Kashf al-ḥaqāʾiq deals with sexagesimal arithmetic, sexagesimal multiplication tables, and linear interpolation. David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 74.", '"A treatise on the computation of degrees and minutes, based on the Kashf al-ḥaḳāʾiḳ of Shihāb al-Dīn Aḥmad ibn al-Majdī. In a muḳaddima, ten bābs, and a khātima." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Andrea Galvani of Pordenone. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 36 and no. 860.', 'Text and title rubricated.', 'On the interpretation of the significance of tremors in various parts of the body as portents of future events.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1039', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.12, copied by Salīm sibṭ al-Shaykh ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Ṭībī [al-Ṭayyibī] with transcription completed 1 Ramaḍān 1262 [August 1846]. In a transmission / ascription statement accompanying the colophon on p.12, the copyist indicates that he transmits this work having received it by authoritative transmission from his grandfather (al-Shaykh ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Ṭībī [al-Ṭayyibī]) who received it from Aḥmad al-ʻAṭṭār who received it from the author himself.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 188', 'Binding: Stiff brown paper cover (single sheet, limp binding without boards) ; sewn in yellow thread, four stations (through the paper cover) ; cover in fair condition with minor creasing, staining, tears, etc. ; housed in sturdy envelope for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), and "G" and "M" watermarks / countermarks visible (see p.8, 10, 12), dense and sturdy, dark cream in color, burnished ; pieces of wove paper have been applied to the \'title page\' (p.1), possibly by the copyist.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and notabilia rubricated.', "Script: Naskh ; clear 'Syrian' [?] hand in a medium line ; serifless and rounded with many closed counters, descenders curvilinear but rāʼ, zay, etc. somewhat flattened, slight effect of tilt to the left, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.", 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: III (6) ; a single ternion ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمت على يد افقر العباد واحوجهم الى المالك الكريم الجواد سليم سبط الشيخ عبد الرحمن الطيبي طيب الله ثراه وجعل الجنة متقلبه ومثواه ورحم والداه وغفر لنا وله ولجميع المسلمين اجمعين والحمد لله رب العالمين تم في غرت رمضان سنه ۱۲٦٢"', 'Explicit: "قلت يا رسول الله اخبرني باحب الاعمال الى الله عز وجل قال ان تموت ولسانك رطب من ذكر الله عز وجل تمت"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي رفع مقدار اهل الحديث وخصهم بحفظ اسانيده في القديم والحديث ... اما بعد فيقول العبد الفقير لمولاه الغني الفتاح اسماعيل العجلوني ابن محمد جراح قد وقفت علي رسالة اظنها البعض المكيين لكني لم اقف علي اسمه ولا علي تسميتها وهي مشتملة على ذكر احاديث من اوائل بعض كتب الحديث ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of a selection of forty ḥadīth taken by the author from various authoritative compilations. Contribution to the cataloguing (citation, variant title) provided by Hossein Mottaghi.'])

en: (count: ['Contains tables and geometrical diagrams.', 'In Maghribī script.', 'Text and title rubricated; marginal notes in hand of copyist and others; vol. has edge title.', 'Date in colophon: bi-tārīkh ʻashar ayyām khalū min shahr Rajab al-fard al-aḥabb sanat 1152 [13 October 1739].', '[11] Qāla al-shaykh al-misāḥah tajzīyat al-shayʾ al-majhūl bi-shayʾ maʻlūm, pp. [206-220]; [12] ʻAbd al-Laṭīf ibn Aḥmad al-Dimishqī, Nukhbat al-tuffāḥah ḥāwiyat qawāʻid al-misāḥah, pp. [226-268].', '[7] al-Wafāʾī, Risālah ʻalá al-ālah al-musammāh bi-dāʾirat al-muʻaddal, pp. [154-160]; [8] Fāʾidah fī dhikr manāzil al-qamar, pp. [161-166]; [9] Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad al-Mizzī, al-Rawḍāt al-muzhirāt fī al-ʻamal bi-rubʻ al-muqanṭarāt, pp. [174-188]; [10] Badr al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad Sibṭ al-Māridīnī, Hidāyat al-sāʾil ilá al-rubʻ al-kāmil, pp. [189-202];', '[5] al-Ḥasan ibn Masʻūd al-Yūsī, Iʻlam innahu lā budda lil-nisbah al-ḥukmīyah bayn al-ṭarfayn al-mawḍūʻ wa-al-maḥmūl an tatakayyaf bi-kayfīyat ḍarūrīyah aw dawām aw iṭlāq aw imkān, pp. [141-147]; [6] ʻIzz al-Dīn ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz ibn Muḥammad al-Wafāʾī, Hādhihi fawāʾid fī al-ʻamal bi-dāʾirat al-muʻaddal, pp. [150-153];', 'Pp. [2-19]. Bound with: [2] Khulāṣat al-maʻālim ʻalá manẓūmat Ibn Ghānim, pp. [22-97]; [3] Abū Jaʻfar ʻUmar ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Tūnisī al-Tūzarī, Maḥṣalat al-maṭlūb fī al-ʻamal bi-rubʻ al-juyūb, pp. [101-132]; [4] Hādhihi risālah fī maʻrifat waḍʻ al-basīṭah wa-waḍʻ qaws al-ʻaṣr fīhā, pp. [133-139];', 'A treatise on the sine quadrant.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Anchor in circle. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), nos. 2 and 4.', 'Text rubricated; marginal corrections and notes in hand of copyist; copy defective, text missing from end of bāb 15 on.', 'On the "complete" quadrant in 25 bābs. Text almost identical to that of Mich. Isl. Ms. 742 through bāb 2, then diverges.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Scrollwork.', 'Text rubricated.', '"An Arabic treatise on the astrolabe short enough to be written on the ṣafīḥah of an astrolabe." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 161.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Three crescents. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Contains tables.', 'Text rubricated.', 'For other copies of this text see Mich. Isl. Mss. 799,1 and 799,4.', '"Abridgement by the author" of "Irshād al-ḥāʾir ... a treatise on sundial theory with tables for latitude 30⁰, Cairo." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 73.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1058', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.38, transcription completed in the last days of Muḥarram 898 [ca. November 1492].', 'Binding: Limp brown leather covers with dark brown leather over spine (type of quarter binding) ; Type III binding (without flap), tight back though not fully flush with text block (ill-fitting or deliberate squares) ; now linings (potentially once flyleaves) in what appears to be European laid paper ; now sewn in white thread, not original ; overall in good condition with minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support: non-European (possibly Persianate) laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly straight) and chain lines only rarely visible in pairs (see p.32) ; only somewhat cloudy furnish with inclusions and bits of fiber visible, heavy and sturdy, quite well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Keywords and headings rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) ; chiefly a clear Turkish / Turkic hand ; serifless with effect of words inclining slightly to the right, elongation of horizontal strokes, foot of lām, kāf, etc. quite curvilinear, kāf mashqūqah preferred with shaqq (curving upward) on even final kāf, final tāʼ marbūṭah often given as tāʼ maftūḥah, point of final or free-standing nūn set either down at center or floating above tall bowl, very casually pointed with pointing for two dots typically via conjoined dots, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page (single column) ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board quite evident).', 'Collation: III-2+3 (7), IV (15), IV-1+4 (26) ; 19 original leaves (paginated 1-38) with 7 added leaves, 3 at the opening of the codex, 4 at the close ; original composition of opening gathering uncertain due to repairs ; mainly quaternions originally ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, center of lower margin of each text page ; added leaves at opening and close of codex not paginated.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تم الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب فى اواخر شهر محرم سنه ٨٩٨ اللهم اغفر لكاتبه ولقاريه ولمن نظر فيه آمين رب العالمين تم"', 'Explicit: "يكون محتويا الى النساء ويكون محفوظا عن اذى الجن والارواح وغيرها والله اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب"', 'Incipit: "لما راينا ان الجزء الاول المختص باسرار الرجال انتهى الى آخره على ما تقدم ذكرها وفصولها لزمنان [كذا] نذكر ايضا فى اسرار النساء التي تدعو الى موافقهن وتوجب الميل اليهن..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.1.', 'Manuscript codex.', 'Fine copy of a treatise of materia medica attributed to Galen, including a number of recipes for drugs intended to treat various sexual conditions.'])

en: (count: ['Contains a diagram of the precession of the equinoxes.', 'Text and tables rubricated; marginal finding aids in another hand.', 'Six tables for determining the times of prayer for the latitude of Cairo and a brief text explaining their use.'])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated and overlined in red; enclosed in gold borders; marginal commentary in hand of copyist; vol. has handpainted covers.', 'Date and name of copyist in colophon: tamma taḥrīr taʻlīqāt al-fāḍil ... ʻalá yad al-faqīr al-ḥājj Aḥmad fī ākhir ayyām al-tashrīq li-sanat sabaʻ wa-sittīn wa-alf [i.e. 22 September 1657].', 'Bound with: 3 pages of calligraphed sayings on the virtues of the art of calligraphy, dated 1246 [i.e. 1830 or 31].', 'Commentary on the proof of the unity of God.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Andrea Galvani of Pordenone. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 35 and no. 860.', 'Text and title rubricated, some rubrication absent; corrections and extensive marginal notes in hand of copyist; kurrāsahs marked "àdad 1" and "àdad 2."', '"A treatise on the astrological significance of various kinds of comets and pseudocomets, with some illustrations.... Merits study." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 105 and plate LXXXIV.', '"Apparently not the same as [Mich. Isl. Ms.] 815,1." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: initials AG in roman; stars in shield with crown. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 36 and nos. 860 and 3886.', 'Text rubricated; copy incomplete.', "Date of mid-19th century based on author's death date.", '"A commentary on Wasīlat al-mubtadiʾīn li ʻilm ghurrat al-shuhūr wa \'l-sinīn, a poem in 48 verses on the calendar by the same author." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Illuminated ʻunwān on pp. [4-5]; text rubricated in gold and red; text enclosed in gold borders; interleaved green (or blue) and pink pages; vol. has edge title.', 'Date and names of copyist and author in colophon: wa-kāna al-far,agh min istinsākh hādhā al-kitāb al-mubārak fī yawm al-khamīs al-mub,arak Jumādī al-Ākhir sanat sitt wa-arbaʻīn wa-alf [i.e. 4 November 1636] khatamat ... ʻalá yad kātibihā wa-muḥarririhā Muḥammad al-Rīdī ... kitāb al-Waṣāyā li-muʾallifihā ... Muḥammad ibn al-ʻArabī.', 'Collection of sayings and admonitions of the prophet Muḥammad with commentary by the author.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 387', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; decoration, hand, paper, etc. suggest 16th century. Ownership statement at close on p.553 referring to Cığalzade Yusuf Sinan Paşa (d.1604) as vezir would seem to indicate a rough terminus ante quem of 1583-1596, i.e. the time of his vezirship prior to being appointed grand vezir.', 'Former shelfmark: "359 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf (p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark maroon leather ; Type II binding (with flap), two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; doublures (board linings) in marbled paper (in pink, orange, and dark blue on white) with hinges in another marbled paper (in red, light blue and green on white) ; upper and lower covers carry stamped (with black recessed onlays) and gold-painted scalloped mandorla in black and gold (filled with vegetal composition compare Déroche class. OAi 8) and incised and gold-painted pendants, as well as gold-tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps framed by fillets ; design continues with rosette and border on envelope flap ; sewn in dark pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and cream (or pale yellow), fairly good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with roughly 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical or horizontal, quite indistinct) and faint irregular chain lines occasionally visible, cloudy formation, some inclusions, quite sturdy though fairly thin and transluscent, beige in color, well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.(4) consisting of small rectangular piece carrying opening line in set off by gold cloud-bands, surmounted by large rectangular piece surrounded in a heavy border and filled with empty gold cartouche and accents evoking bookcover design overlaid with swirling floral vegetal pattern in red, blue, yellow, gold, etc. on fields of lapis lazuli and gold, surmounted by triangular piece or hasp set in a rectangular piece with same swirling floral vegetal pattern on fields of lapis lazuli and gold, all surmounted by a series of vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue with red accents ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by heavy frame in a series of gold, green, red and blue bands ; keywords of incipit and facing page in blue or chrysographed ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of gold band with outermost blue rule ; headings, keywords and some excerpts rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant hand ; serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, mainly closed counters, pointing in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; written area occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry interspersed throughout.', 'Collation: i, 34 IV(272), II+1 (277) ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf).', 'Explicit: "تصدق قلوب بو ثوابي داخى موجب مزيد حسنات بيله لر تم"', 'Incipit: "رب اشرح لى صدرى ويسر لى امرى واحلل عقدة من لسانى يفقهوا قولي يا رب ره عشقكده بنى شيدا قيل احكام عبادتك بكا اجرا قيل ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of Fuzulî's rendering of the suffering of the prophets, particularly Imām Ḥusayn in the tragedy at Karbalāʼ, drawn from Ḥusayn Vāʻiẓ Kāshifī's Rawz̤at al-shuhadāʼ, a Persian martyrology of ʻAlī and his family."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 281', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; hand, paper, etc. may suggest 16th century. Date in seal impression provides an approximate terminus ante quem of 1107 [1695 or 1696] depending on the elapsed time between the making of the seal and its impression in the ms.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in painted lacquerwork ; Type II binding (with flap) ; spine and fore edge flap in dark brown leather ; doublures and interior of envelope flap in red brown (dark red) leather with recessed inlays of paper in lapis lazuli, light blue, yellow, and green with filigree in brown and black leather ; upper and lower covers bear painted lacquerwork design in gold, green, red, black, and dark red of nearly identical composition ; design consists of scalloped central mandorla (reminiscent of Déroche class. OSd 8), pendants, and corner pieces with border consisting of a series of lozenges ; all are filled with an elaborate swirling floral vegetal design ; upper and lower doublures bear central scalloped mandorla, pendants and corner pieces in leather filigree (black and brown) and recessed paper inlays (lapis lazuli, green, light blue, and yellow) surrounded by simple gold-painted border accents ; interior of envelope flap continues design of doublures ; sewn in white and blue green threads (intertwined), two stations ; worked endbands in blue green, white and pink (traces) ; in poor condition with extensive abrasion to covers resulting in loss of lacquer and paint ; spine leather lifting and detaching from text block, upper cover detacing ; some pest damage ; boards delaminating ; endbands nearly gone ; paper label pasted to upper cover (no writing) ; currently housed in envelope.', 'Support: non-European laid paper (untinted but gold-flecked) set in tinted leaves of non-European (likely Persian) laid paper, mainly alternating shades of blue (often toward green) and yellow, occasionally pink ; laid lines of set-in written area running horizontally spaced roughly 7 laid lines per cm. ; laid lines of tinted leaves running vertically spaced roughly 8-10 laid lines per cm. with curving and sagging ; chain lines difficult to view but may be sporadic short lengths ; a few inclusions ; well-burnished and smooth ; flyleaves of several paper types - European laid paper, non-European (likely Persian) laid paper (decorative silhouette paper), and Persian or Indian laid paper of no earlier than late 18th century.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) on fol.1a consisting of rectangular piece surmounted by triangular or hasp piece ; rectangular piece carries lobed central lozenge in gold, with flanking pieces in gold and red all on a field of lapis lazuli with floral vegetal pattern in black, red, yellow, white, and lavender ; bordered in bands of white, blue, and gold (with swirling pattern) ; surmounted by triangular piece or hasp in gold and lapis lazuli with same floral vegetal pattern ; surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) ; a band of black with same floral vegetal pattern and flanking bands of red and gold separates the two pieces ; simple illuminated headpieces throughout and at close consisting of rectangular piece with central gold cartouche (empty) flanked by almond-shaped pieces in black or red on fields of lapis lazuli with swirling vegetal motif bordered in bands of gold and red ; "tailpiece" accompanied by flanking rectangular pieces with swirling floral vegetal pattern in black, red, yellow, white and lavender on fields of gold, bordered in blue ; written area surrounded by a frame consisting of a series of bands varying in color according to tint of surrounding leaf ; for lighter colored leaves the frame is in green, gold, black and blue and for darker colored leaves the frame is in blue, gold, black and red ; simple gold bands outlined by black fillets frame columns within written area.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; sans serif ; characteristic descent of words to baseline along with superscript of final words and letters at end of many lines ; characteristic letterforms ; contrast in thickness of horizontal and vertical strokes ; horizontal strokes often elongated.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; single column divided to two columns to set off poetry ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iii, 4 III (24), II (28), IV (36), I (38), ii ; chiefly ternions ; catchwords present.', 'Explicit: "من وفایی ندیده ام ز خسان گر تو بینی سلام من برسان ... چون مصفا شوی زرزق وزفن مرد گر دی اگر چه هستی زن"', 'Incipit: "ای درون پرور برون آرای ای خرد بخش [بیخرد] بخشای"', 'Title from inscriptions on front flyleaf and fol.1a.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Exquisite manuscript containing what appears to be excerpts from the mystical mathawī (mas̲navī) of Sanāʼī, Ḥadīqat al-ḥaqīqah wa-sharīʻat al-ṭarīqah.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 890', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; date of composition and dedication (executed for Naṣīr al-Dawlah Fāris al-Mulk Navvāb Muḥammad ʻAlīʹkhān Bahādur Sipahdār Jang / نصير الدوله فارس الملك نواب محمد عليخان بهادر سپهدار جنگ ) appear in authorial colophon on p.300, Rabīʻ II 1226 [1811] ; date in octagonal seal impression provides only a very approximate terminus ante quem of 1864 ; paper, etc. suggest 19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with note "Counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" -- b. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Husselman and Meredith-Owen notes" -- c. Scrap with description in black ink "Muḥammad Ṣādiḳ Khān called Akhhan ? | Hadīḳat al Irshād. A treatise on the art of composition. AH. 1226 = A.D. 1811" -- d. Slip with description (in hand of E. Husselman ?) "Muẖammad Ṣādiḳ Khan, called Akhbar | Hadiḳat al-Irshād | n.f. in BMCat. Pers. bks or MSS | Not in U. of M. MSS. | 148 ff. | 295 pp." -- e. Slip with description in hand of G. Meredith-Owens "MO 20 Ḥadīqat al-irshād by Muḥammad Ṣādiq Khān called Akhbār (?). A treatise on the art of composition" -- f. Slip or tag with "#3" in red pencil -- g. Page torn from Luzac & Co. catalog, 1908, \'Books on Modern Persian Literature,\' with description of this manuscript "237 MOHAMMAD SĀDIK KHAN, called AKHBAR. Hadikat al Irshād. A treatise on the Art of Composition. Persian MS. Roy. 8vo. 8s. 6d. Dated 1811"', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 39', 'Binding: Boards covered in orange-red cloth with dark brown leather over spine and board corners (half binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted wove paper ; leather blind-tooled with toothed border ; spine gold-stamped with title "HADIQAT | UL | IRSHAD" and rules defining raised bands ; edges of text block flecked with red ; sewn over five recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands in red and yellow ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion and deterioration of spine leather, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian or Persian) laid paper with roughly 11 laid lines per cm. (mainly horizontal, somewhat indistinct, curving) and occasional chain lines, cloudy formation, inclusions and fibers visible, thin and transluscent though sturdy, dark cream in color, burnished ; some pest damage and repairs (fills) ; blocking between pp.244-245.', 'Decoration: Keywords and headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas ; overlining in red ; overlining with two-teeth stroke in red ; a table (جدول) on p.283 and a few other diagrams.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant, spacious, Indian [?] hand ; serifless with dramatic effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing (two and three dots) mainly in strokes rather than distinct dots, some free assimilation of letters.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iv, 12 IV(96), III (102), 5 IV(142), III (148), i ; amost exclusively quaternions except for two ternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of short black strokes in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf and lower-outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; several leaves at opening left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and mistakenly repeats p.242 two additional times).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," rectangular, reads "الحمد لله و المنة که بقدر یافت و استعدادی ... در ماه ربیع الثانی سنه ۱۲۲۶ هزار و دو صد بیست و شش هجرى قدسی بموجب ارشاد کرامت ... نصیر الدوله فارس الملک نواب محمد علیخان بهادر سپهدار جنگ ... تمت تمام شد"', 'Explicit: "ر اتمامي حاصل آید بخیر دیگر حاجت مند شود"', 'Incipit: "بانشای سپاس بدیع نگاری رگ ابر قلم تردست ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.9).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of a treatise on the art of composition by Muḥammad Ṣādiq Khān, known as Akhtar (d.1858?).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 429', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; decoration, hand, paper, etc. would suggest 16th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "400 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" and "237" inscribed in pencil on \'title page’.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold-painted scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OAi2 1) and pendants, along with gold-painted accents and tooled border ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of leather (spine and fore edge flap in particular), minor delamination of upper board, etc. ; repairs to fore edge flap in paper.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persianate) laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, somewhat indistinct) and no chain lines plainly visible, fairly thick and sturdy, well-burnished ; severe moisture damage to incipit page.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche now carrying title "حديث اربعين لمولانا جامى" flanked by floral vegetal pieces in gold, pink, and orange on a field of blue, surmounted by a scalloped triangular piece or hasp continuing floral vegetal design, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area of incipit page (larger than written area elsewhere) appears to be gold or silver flecked, elsewhere only portions of the written area appear to be gold or silver flecked ; written area throughout surrounded by a gold frame with outermost blue rule ; ḥadīth text chrysographed.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless with characteristic descent of words to baseline and superscripting of final words and letters ; elongation of horizontal strokes ; text of ḥadīth fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in roughly 9 lines per page, three of ḥadīth text and six of the Persian verse paraphrase with the hemistiches of four lines of verse divided and arranged on the diagonal ; written area divided to set off the ḥadīth text and elucidation ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV+1 (9) ; quaternion with added leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Authorial," reads " تمت ترجمه هذه الاربعين بتوفيق من هو ناصر ومعين سنه ست و ثمانين و ثمانمائة متع الله بها كل فريق فيه و الحمد لله على الاتمام و الصلوه و السلام على محمد و آله البررة الكرام"', 'Explicit: "وقال لا يشبع المؤمن من دون جاره هر که در خطه مسلمانی باشد از نقد دین گر انمایه ... تمت ترجمه هذه الاربعين بتوفيق من هو ناصر ومعين سنه ست و ثمانين و ثمانمائة متع الله بها كل فريق فيه و الحمد لله على الاتمام و الصلوه و السلام على محمد و آله البررة الكرام اربعینهاى سالکان جامی هست بهر وصول صدر قبول بنود از فضل حق عجیب و غریب که بدین اربعین رسی بوصول"', 'Incipit: "صحیح ترین حدیثی که راویان مجالس دین ... اما بعد این چهل کلمه است ازان کلمات که سهولت فهم و حفظ را بنظم فارسی ترجمه گر ده می آید امید ... لا يؤمن احدكم حتى يحب لاخيه ما يحب لنفسه هر کسی را لقب مکن مؤمن گرچه از سعی جان وتن کاهد ..."', 'Title from headpiece at opening (p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Jāmī's verse paraphrase of forty ḥadīth."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 566', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.426, copied by Walī ibn Shaʻbān (Veli bin Şaban) with transcription completed Muḥarram 1080 [June 1669]. As appears in preceding authorial colophon (also on p.426), composition completed 1 Rajab 981 [ca. 27 October 1573].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. 46 slips carrying glosses, etc. (paginated, e.g. pp.33-34, 35-36, 37-38, 43-44, etc.).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and fore edge flap label "IL 407" (likely supplied by Yahuda see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in dull yellow-tinted paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OSv 1) ; sewn in light brown or grey thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in cream and or light yellow, fair condition, some losses to tailband ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, some lifting and losses of leather, minor delamination of upper board, etc. ; numerous repairs to board edges, spine, and flap in red and tan leathers.', 'Support: European laid paper with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (horizontal), crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.22,23, etc.) and "S S" under trefoil countermark (see p.340) ; sturdy and dense, quite well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; overlining in red ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; an elegant Turkish hand ; virtually serifless with tilt to the right, slight effect of words descending to baseline, partially vocalized ; text following preface (p.14) supplied in a different hand.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, I+1 (3), 5 V(53), VI (65), 10 V(165), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Authorial" reads "في غرة شهر رجب من شهور سنة احدى وثمانين وتسعمائة حامدا لله تعالى ومصليا ومسلما على رسوله محمد ... آمين" ; "Scribal" reads "قد وقع الفراغ من تنميق هذه النسخة الشريفة على يد احوج الورى الى رحمة ربه الاعلى يوم الاحد في وقت العصر [من المحرم الحرام] ولي بن شعبان غفر الله العافي عنهما ... من شهور سنة ثمانين والف من هجرة من له العز والشرف ... تم تم تم"', 'Explicit: "فعليكم ايها الاخ [الاخوان] بالتقوى والاستعداد للقاء الله عز وجل ونعم الاخرة الحمد لله على التمام لوصول التحرير بالاختتام ... برحمة ربنا ذي الجلال والاكرام ورزقهم الفوز هول يوم القيامة"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعل قلوب العلماء مرايا جمال معاني الهداية ... اما بعد فيقول العبد الفقير الى رحمة ربه وشفاعة نبيه ابو الليث المحرم بن محمد بن العارف بن الحسن الزيلي [؟] ... لما كنت اذاكر كتاب تحفة الملوك ... سألني بعض الطلبة ان اشرحها شرحا يفتح مخفياته وينشر مطوياته ... فاستخرت الله وشرعت الدعاء فالهمني بان ليس للانسان الا ما سعى فطالعت المتون المتداولة والشروح المستعملة مستعينا به ... وسميته هدية الصعلوك في شرح تحفة الملوك ... الحمد لله وسلام على عباده الذين اسطفى ولكن لم يصف الله تعالى بجلال ذاته وكمال صفاته ..."', 'Title from opening matter (preface) on p.12.', 'Ms. codex.', '7. p.429-430 : [blank].', '6. p.427-p.428 : [excerpts].', '5. p.14-p.426 : [continuation of Hadīyat al-ṣuʻlūk fī sharḥ Tuḥfat al-mulūk] / Abū al-Layth al-Muḥarram ibn Muḥammad al-Zīlī.', '4. p.13 : [waqf statement].', '3. p.11-p.13 : [preface of Hadīyat al-ṣuʻlūk fī sharḥ Tuḥfat al-mulūk] / Abū al-Layth al-Muḥarram ibn Muḥammad al-Zīlī.', '2. p.9-p.10 : [contents listing].', '1. p.1-p.8 : [assorted excerpts].', 'Fine copy of the commentary by Abū al-Layth al-Muḥarram ibn Muḥammad ibn al-ʻĀrif al-Zīlī (al-Zaylāʻī) upon al-Rāzī’s compendium of Ḥanafī law, Tuḥfat al-mulūk. Preceded by contents listing (pp.9-10), along with various excerpts at opening and close of codex.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Three crescents. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Tables rubricated.', "Date from owner's mark on p. [1].", 'Tables for sexagesimal multiplication and for astronomical observations.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 325', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.1025, transcription completed in Muḥarram 955 [February or March 1548].', 'Former shelfmark: "132 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black and dark red-brown (spine, fore edge flap, edges / turn-ins, possibly repairs) leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in light brown leather with central mandorla and cornerpieces in filigree appliqué over blue paper as well as gold-painted accents and tooled border ; upper and lower covers carry large block-stamped (two impressions with join visible) and gold-painted recessed rectangular panel filled with symmetrical vegetal composition with chī clouds and floral motifs, surrounded by gold-tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps defined by gold fillets ; design continues on flap ; fore edge flap stamped and gold-painted, stamp carries "لصاحبه السعادة والسلامة" ; edges of text block gold-painted with floral motifs ; sewn in light red thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in lime green and light red, damaged ; overall in somewhat fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, etc. ; repairs in Japanese paper ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and no chain lines clearly visible, quite thin, crisp and transluscent, well-burnished ; some staining, tidelines and foxing.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of large rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying opening section (preface) title ("ديباجه سبعه") in white surrounded by swirling arabesque with floral motifs (in gold, green, light blue, pink, red, etc.) on fields of lapis lazuli and gold (evoking book cover design), surmounted by gold band with floral motifs in blue and red and rectangular piece with row of swirling arabesque on fields of lapis lazuli and gold (evoking a row of domes), all surrounded by border in blue with white crosses and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; additional illuminated headpieces (rectangular) at openings of other sections, mainly the rest of the seven mas̲navīs (p.180, 254, 306, 360, 362, 440, 574, 752, 922) ; written area throughout surrounded by frame of gold band defined by black fillets and outermost gold and blue rules, columns within outlined by narrow gold bands defined by black fillets ; keywords and section headings rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant, compact hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 29 lines per page, 17 in left most column(s) with as many as 12 lines on the diagonal in the rightmost column ; written area divided to two and three columns to set-off poetry ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, V-1 (9), 50 V(509), III-1 (514), ii ; almost exclusively quinions ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between pp.873-874).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, mainly in Arabic, reads "تمت السبعه بعون الله وحسن توفيقه يوم السبت من محرم الحرام سنه خمس وخمسين وتسعمائة والحمد لله اولا واخرا باطنا وظاهرا م م م"', 'Explicit: "که تا بیند از گوش دل بر کشیم همه گوش کردیم و دم در کشیم"', 'Incipit: "حمد الرب جلیل من عبد ذليیل وسلاما [؟] علی حبیب فائق من محب صادق و علی صحبه و آله المهتدین بنور جماله نظم این هفت مثنویست که چون هفت آسمان ..."', 'Title from inscription on flyleaf at opening.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the seven mas̲navīs of Jāmī (d.1492) collected under the title Haft awrang.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 326', 'Origin: As appears in colophons on p.143, 198 and 237, daftars of Silsilat al-ẕahab copied by Ghāzī Qulī Arghūn with transcription completed in Sunbul [?] (بلدۀ سنبل) on the 2nd, 21st and 30th of Shawwāl 969 [ca. 5th June, 24th June, 3rd July 1562]. This copyist may have also executed the final mas̲navī (Khiradnāmah-i Iskandarī). As appears in colophons on p.296 and 605, Tuḥfat al-Aḥrār and Yūsuf va Zulaykhā copied by Abū Aḥmad ibn ʻAbd Allāh al-Qāḍī al-Farāhī with transcription of Tuḥfat al-Aḥrār completed 14 Ramaḍān 969 [ca. 18 May 1562] and transcription of Yūsuf va Zulaykhā completed 7 Rabīʻ I 970 [?] [ca. 4 November 1562]. Much of the decoration in the sections executed by these two copyists is similar and was perhaps accomplished by the same craftsman. Transcription of other mas̲navīs likely completed around the same time, though possibly by still a different copyist.', 'Former shelfmark: "152 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in painted lacquerwork with dark brown (to black) leather over spine ; Type III binding (without flap), two piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; doublures fine painted lacquerwork with paintings of a tall narcissus-like plant with leaves in shades of green and flowers and buds in yellow with pink accents at the head of a central stalk, flanked by leaves and smaller pink flowers, all on a red ground with border in black with gold accents (composition of upper doublure mirrors that of lower doublure) ; upper and lower covers carry paintings of nearly identical composition in mirror image to one another on an emerald green background, namely a central cluster of peonies, poppies, tulips, roses, irises, etc. with additional buds and floral forms filling the main panel all in shades of pink, light blue, lavender, yellow and white with leaves in various shades of green, and surrounded by a border of floral motifs in shades of blue, red and white on a red ground defined by bands of black with repeating vegetal patterns in bronze-gold ; sewn in blue thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in blue and magenta, good condition (partially protected by tabs of extended spine leather) ; overall in fair condition with some cracking and chipping of lacquer, minor delamination at board corners, abrasion of spine leather, etc. ; likely not original to codex ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper of at least two main types ; one type (at the opening and close of the transcript) with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal or vertical, somewhat indistinct) and no chain lines plainly visible, thin and transluscent, dark cream in color, well-burnished ; another type with roughly 9 laid lines per cm. (mainly vertical, quite indistinct) and no chain lines plainly visible, dense and sturdy (much thicker than the other type and far less transluscent), dark cream in color, well-burnished ; added leaves at opening and close of codex in Wove paper with grayish hue ; endpapers in European laid paper (three hats, i.e. top hats with feathers, watermark visible in back flyleaf, "A" visible in front flyleaf, compare Eineder no.708), surface dyed a yellow-orange and gold or silver-flecked.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) appears at opening of each section (each mas̲navī and daftars of Silsilat al-ẕahab, pp.146, 200, 240, 398, 480, 608, 732) mainly consisting of rectangular pieces with floral vegetal compositions (in lapis, gold, turquoise, pink, lavender, and white with some interlace and white banding with black crosses) but varying widely ; further illuminated decorations (typically with floral vegetal motifs) appear in the ruled margins. headings typically rubricated or chrysographed but occasionally in blue ; written area throughout (and divisions within, including ruled margins) surrounded by gold frame defined by black fillets with outermost blue (and through p.478 additional red) rule.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; at least three main hands ; hands of the two copyists are quite similar, each in an elegant, medium line, characteristically serifless with gentle effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots ; a third central hand (see pp.298-478) is more delicate, in a narrower line, less compact with even greater effect of elongation.', 'Layout: Written in roughly 49 lines per page with 17 lines in central written area divided to two columns and 32 lines on the diagonal in the ruled margins ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, IV +1 (9), IV-2 (15), 8 IV (79), III (85), 3 IV (109), IV + 2 (119), 3 IV (143), III-1 (148), III (154), 4 IV (186), III (192), 5 IV (232), III + 1 (239), III + 1 (246), 6 IV (294), IV + 1 (303), 5 IV (343), III (349), 2 IV (365), 2 II (373), 3 IV (397), IV-4+4 (405), i ; chiefly quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of oblique strokes in black ink appear in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf and lower outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: [Silsilat al-ẕahab] "باتمام رسید کتاب سلسله الذهب روز جمعه بتاریخ سلخ شهر شوال فی تسعه ستین تسعمایه کتبه غازی قلی ارغون تم تم" ; [Tuḥfat al-Aḥrār] "... اتمام انتظام این تحفه در ماه تسبیح وشهر تراویح رابع عشر رمضان المبارک سنه تسع وستین وتسعمایة بر دست ناسخ این نسخه کرامی احقر عباد الله ابو احمد ابن عبد الله القاضی سمت تحریر یافت ...""', 'Incipit: "سر تعریف آنکه بشتابی تا کمال شناخت دریابی ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from edge title.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '18. p.803-810 : [added leaves ruled but left blank].', '17. p.732-p.802 : [Khiradnāmah-i Iskandarī].', '16. p.731 : [blank apart from title statement].', '15. p.608-p.730 : [Majnūn va Laylá].', '14. p.606-607 : [blank apart from ownership statements and title statement].', '13. p.480-p.605 : [Yūsuf va Zulaykhā].', '12. p.479 : [blank except for title statement].', '11. p.298-p.377 : [Salāmān va Absāl, on the margins].', '10. p.298-p.478 : [Subḥat al-abrār].', '9. p.297 : [blank apart from title statement].', '8. p.240-p.296 : [Tuḥfat al-Aḥrār].', '7. p.238-p.239 : [blank apart from title statement].', '6. p.200-p.237 : [Silsilat al-ẕahab, daftar-i sivum].', '5. p. 199 : [blank apart from title statement].', '4. p.146-p.198 : [Silsilat al-ẕahab, daftar-i duvvum].', '3. p.144-p.145 : [blank apart from ownership and title statements].', '2. p.19-p.143 : [Silsilat al-ẕahab, daftar-i avval].', '1. p.1-p.18 : [added leaves with excerpts on opening leaf, otherwise ruled but left blank].', 'Elegant (though acephalous and incomplete) copy of the seven mas̲navīs of Jāmī (d.1492) collected under the title Haft awrang. Text mainly continues from central written area into the ruled margins of each opening (in certain sections additional catchwords are visible). Descriptive contributions from Sarah Mirza.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 333', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, etc. may suggest 17th or even late 16th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "528 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark mahogany leather ; Western style binding (hollow back, not flush, rounded spine, etc.) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in textured and coated, foil-stamped paper (scalloped floral vegetal design in green and gold on white) ; upper and lower covers carry gold-stamped (over onlays, orange leather / shagreen and blue coated and embossed paper) oval central ornament with radiating vegetal design, cornerpieces and border pieces ; on spine, raised bands as well as further stamped ornaments over orange shagreen onlays and at center another oval ornament in green ; eges of text block gilt ; now sewn in white thread over two heavy recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (mainly vertical, somewhat indistinct) and no chain lines plainly visible, cloudy formation, beige in color, sturdy, well-burnished ; some staining ; replacement leaves in wove paper ; some leaves guarded.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of large rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying effaced title in red, surrounded by swirling arabesque (in turquoise, red, gold, etc.) and geometric motifs defined by white bands on a field of blue (approaching lapis lazuli), bordered in heavy band of gold interlace and floral vegetal desgin in gold, red and blue on a black ground, surmounted by scalloped triangular piece or hasp (filled with floral vegetal design on a gold ground) set into a rectangular band filled with arabesque on a blue (approaching lapis lazuli) ground, all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area throughout surrounded by frame in gold bands with outermost blue rule, columns within written area also bounded by gold rules ; numerous lacunae left, possibly for headpieces and rubricated passages (only opening mas̲navī bears headpiece ; rubricated text has been provided for opening of Silsilat al-ẕahab, see pp.582-605).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, written area mainly divided into four columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 3 IV(24), 2 IV-2+2 (40), IV (8), IV-2+2 (56), 3 IV(80), III+1 (87), 5 IV(127), III (133), II (137), 7 IV(179), 2 IV(195), 3 III(213), IV-2+2 (221), III (227), 7 IV(283), II (287), 2 IV(303), 2 III(315), IV (323), III-4+4 (329), II (333), III+2 (341), III-4+4 (347), III (353), i ; mainly quaternions and ternions (some anomalous) ; numerous missing leaves have been replaced but with lacunae left unfilled ; moisture damage or intential removal of text from p.487 ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Incipit: [Yūsuf va Zulaykhā] "الهی غنچه امید بگشای گلی از روضه جاوید بنمای ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '11. p.582-p.705 : [Silsilat al-ẕahab, daftar-i avval, etc.] / Jāmī.', '10. p.581 : [blank].', '9. p.472-p.580 : [Silsilat al-ẕahab, daftar-i duvvum] / Jāmī.', '8. p.470-p.471 : [blank].', '7. p.360-p.469 : [Subḥat al-abrār] / Jāmī.', '6. p.358-p.359 : [blank].', '5. p.276-p.357 : [Khiradnāmah-i Iskandarī] / Jāmī.', '4. p.275 : [blank].', '3. p.146-p.274 : Majnūn va Laylá / Jāmī.', '2. p.144-p.145 : [blank].', '1. p.2-p.143 : [Yūsuf va Zulaykhā] / Jāmī.', "Fine though incomplete copy of the seven mas̲navīs of Jāmī (d.1492) collected under the title Haft awrang, opening with Yūsuf va Zulaykhā and concluding with Silsilat al-ẕahab (arrangement differs from that outlined in Jāmī's preface). Appears to lack Salāmān va Absāl and Tuḥfat al-Aḥrār."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 327', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at close on p.617, copied by Sulṭān Muḥammad Tāyabādī (who also completed the transcript of Isl. Ms. 286 in Rabīʻ I 1066 / ca. January 1656) with transcription completed in Rajab 1060 [July 1650].', 'Former shelfmark: 187 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap), possibly two-piece binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in light-blue embossed paper (swirling grape and vine pattern over lined bands) with gold-painted border ; upper and lower covers carry large gold-stamped, scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, reminiscent of Déroche class. OAi 5), pendants, cornerpieces and bordering lozenges flanked by gold-painted borders in rules and a series of s-shaped stamps ; edges of text block gold and silver-painted with strokes and saz leaf motifs ; sewn in red thread, four stations ; worked chevron endbands in burgandy and gold, good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and red rot of leather at corners, board edges and spine.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical or horizontal, fairly distinct, curving) and occasional chain lines faintly visible, beige to light brown in color, burnished ; tinted wove papers have been inserted to protect illuminated decoration at openings (occasional "L-JDL & Co" watermark) ; repairs to tears in leaves using paper ; guards on earlier leaves ; breakthrough along gold frames in some leaves.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece at opening of preface (p.2) consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche surmounted by scalloped dome each filled with delicated swirling vegetal pattern in gold and white with yellow, red, lavender and green floral accents all on a striking lapis lazuli ground and set in a well of heavy gold interlace flanked by bands of red and light blue with crosses in white and dark blue ; brilliant illuminated double-page opening marks each of the seven mas̲navīs (and each of the two daftars in Silsilat al-ẕahab) on pp.4-5, 108-109, 186-187, 220-221, 268-269, 348-349, 456-457, 554-555, involving rectangular pieces filled with varying vegetal designs on fields of lapis lazuli, gold, etc., bands of gold interlace, and flanking borders of swirling vegetal designs incorporating flowers, saz leaves, etc. ; written area gold-flecked and surrounded by frame of gold, turquoise (pistachio), red and blue bands defined by black fillets ; section headings and some keywords rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; small, elegant hand in a thin line ; characteristically serifless with gentle effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, contrast in thickness of horizontal and vertical strokes, pointing in conjoined or distinct dots, long sweeping shaqq on kāf, point of final or free-standing nūn often omitted but where present set just down in bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 20 lines per page with written area mainly divided to four columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 37 IV (296), III (302), IV-1 (309), ii ; catchwords present ; leaves between sections left partially blank ; pagination in Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, in Arabic, reads "تمت الكتاب بعنايت الملك الكريم الوهاب تحريرا فى تاريخ شهر رجب المرجب سنه ١۰۶۰ كتبه سلطان محمد تایبادی"', 'Explicit: "که تا بیند از گوش دل بر کشیم همه گوش کردیم و دم در کشیم"', 'Incipit: "حمد الرب جلیل من عبد ذليیل وسلاما علی حبیب فایق من محب صادق و علی آله المهتدین بنور جماله اما بعد نظم این هفت مثنویست که چون هفت آسمان ..."', "Title from inscriptions on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the seven mas̲navīs of Jāmī (d.1492) collected under the title Haft awrang. Descriptive contributions from Sarah Mirza.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 557', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.562, copied by Aḥmad ibn Khiḍr (Ahmet bin Hızır [Hazır]) with transcription completed 6 Rabīʻ I 958 [ca. 14 March 1551] in Edirne.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Three inventory cataloguing slips in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. -- c. Insert carrying glosses (paginated pp.91-92).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover "IL 223" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap, now lost) ; board linings in comb marbled paper (salmon, orange, red, blue) ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla filled with vegetal composition with bird at center ; sewn in dull yellow thread, two stations ; overall in quite poor condition with flap missing, significant losses to upper outer corner of upper board (and opening quires), lifting and losses of leather, staining, abrasion, pest damage, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines (vertical) grouped in threes with 12-15 mm. between chains and 38-42 between groups ; quite sturdy and well-burnished, dark cream in color ; much staining ; losses of upper outer corners of opening quires (through p.142).', 'Decoration: Section headings, keywords and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; a few textual dividers in the form of inverted commas.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Turkish hand in a medium line ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf) with often sweeping shaqq, point of final nūn assimilated with bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 27 V(270), IV (278), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (not visible in opening quires due to damage) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and insert and mistakenly skips ahead ten pages, following p.455 with p.466).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "تم الكتاب بعون الوهاب على يد اضعف العباد احمد بن خضر غفر الله لهم ولجميع المؤمنين والمؤمنات والمسلمين والمسلمات الاحياء منهم والاموات قد فرغ من تحرير هذه النسخة الشريفة بمحروسة ادرنه المحمية صانها الله عن الافات والبلية يوم الجمعة سادس ربيع الاول من سنة ثمانية وخمسين وتسعمائة من الهجرة النبوية"', 'Explicit: "ومع ذلك يباح التناول اعتمادا على الغالب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على خير خلقه محمد واله اجمعين يقول العبد العبد المتوسل الى الله تعالى باقوى الذريعة عبيد الله بن مسعود بن تاج الشريعة ... هذا حل المواضع المقلقة من وقاية الرواية في مسائل الهداية اللتي الفها جدي ..."', 'Title from opening on p.4.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Well-annoted copy of the commentary by Ṣadr al-Sharīʻah al-Aṣghar (al-Thānī) ʻUbayd Allāh ibn Masʻūd al-Maḥbūbī on Wiqāyat al-riwāyah fī masāʼil al-Hidāyah, a work on fiqh by the author’s grandfather, Maḥmūd ibn Ṣadr al-Sharīʻah al-Maḥbūbī (d. 1274 or 5), itself an epitome on the celebrated work of Ḥanafī fiqh, al-Hidāyah by ʻAlī ibn Abī Bakr al-Marghīnānī (d. 1196 or 7).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 96', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests 16th century. Dated note on p.5 may provide a rough terminus ante quem of 1579-1580.', 'Accompanying materials: Several slips with notes (paginated pp.51-52, pp.55-56, pp.61-62, pp.73-74, pp.95-96, pp.97-98).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 144. Sharh al-Wikayah."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather with repairs/reinforcements in red leather over spine and edges/turn-ins ; Type III binding (without flap, though textblock shows signs of having once been covered in a Type II binding, with flap) ; board linings in paper ; upper and lower covers bear blind-stamped scalloped mandorla with floral vegetal composition (compare Déroche class. OAi 5) and tooled accents ; sewn mainly in light blue thread, latter quires in red, two stations ; worked endbands in light blue and cream ; in poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, flap detached at lower cover, etc.', 'Support: Assortment of European and non-European laid papers ; European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (vertical) ; watermarks include anchor in circle with star above (compare Piccard no.119016) and angel in circle with flower or star above (compare Piccard no.21417) ; non-European laid paper with chain lines grouped in threes is quite well-burnished ; much staining throughout ; some leather burn ; numerous repairs.', 'Decoration: Section headings, keywords and abbreviations rubricated ; overlining in black and red.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq ; virtually serifless ; mainly closed counters ; effect of words descending to baseline, occasionally more exaggerated ; occasional extension of horizontal strokes ; final nūn often forming full circle with point at center.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: II (4), IV+1 (13), 5 IV(53), 2 V(73), IV-1 (80), 3 IV(104), III (110), V (120), V+1 (131), 5 IV(171), IV-1 (178), ii ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present, though often cutoff ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and back flyleaves, skips two pages between pp.235-236).', 'Explicit: "لدفع الخروج واسواق المسلمين لا يخلو عن المسروق والمغصوب والمحرم ومع ذلك يباح التناول اعتمادا على الغائب [الغالب؟] . تم الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب واليه المرجع والمآب والحمد لله رب العالمين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله اجمعين يا رب العالمخين امين معين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة على خير خلقه محمد واله اجمعين يقول العبد المتوسل الى الله تعالى باقوى الذريعة عبيد الله بن مسعود بن تاج الشريعة بن محمود ... هذا حل المواضع المغلقة من وقاية الرواية من مسائل الهداية التى الفها جدي واستاذي الاعظم استاذ علماء العالم برهان الشريعة والحق والدين محمود بن صدر الشريعة ..."', 'Title from opening (p.8).', 'Ms. codex.', "Well-annoted copy of the commentary by Ṣadr al-Sharīʻah al-Aṣghar (al-Thānī) ʻUbayd Allāh ibn Masʻūd al-Maḥbūbī on Wiqāyat al-riwāyah fī masāʼil al-Hidāyah, a work on fiqh by the author's grandfather, Maḥmūd ibn Ṣadr al-Sharīʻah al-Maḥbūbī (d. 1274 or 5), itself an epitome on the celebrated work of Ḥanafī fiqh, al-Hidāyah by ʻAlī ibn Abī Bakr al-Marghīnānī (d. 1196 or 7)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 226', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.419, copied by Aḥmad Imāmʻzādah al-Qasṭamūnī (Ahmet İmamzade el-Kastamoni) with transcription finished in Shawwāl 1197 [September 1783].', 'Former shelfmark: "342 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "20" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.3).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in tan leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns/flyleaves in gold-flecked yellow-green surface-dyed paper ; upper and lower covers carry gold-stamped (over red-oranged recessed onlays) mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, similar to Déroche class. NSd 7), pendants and cornerpieces with gold-tooled and gold-painted accents as well as guilloché roll border ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and black, damaged ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper ; opening type with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), and crown and grapes (raisin) watermark (see p.6, 20, etc.), heavily sized and burnished, crisp and transluscent though sturdy, light beige in color ; latter gatherings (from p.181) lighter in color and with " C C W" ["G C W" ?] watermark (see p.190, 191, 230, 231, 420, 421, etc.).', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.4 consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche and flanking floral motifs in gold, red, and green surmounted by a shallow w-shaped piece filled with swirling floral vegetal decoration in green and red on a filed of gold, surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in red and blue and set in a well of decorative bands in light blue, red, white, and gold ; written area throughout surrounded by frame consisting of a series of gold bands with an outer red fillet and a separate red fillet (narrow gold band for incipit and facing page) surrounding the area of the margins ; keywords rubricated ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; virtually serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing (for two and three dots) mainly in strokes rather than distinct dots, kāf mashqūqah preferred.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 20 V(200), V+2 (212), i ; exclusively quinions (one anomalous) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and mistakenly skips two pages each between pp.101-102 and 321-322).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب وقد كملت هذه المعرب في شهر شوال سنة سبع وتسعين ومائة والف عن يد عبد الضعيف الحاج احمد امام زاده القسطموني غفر له"', 'Explicit: "ويجوز ان يكون صفة رجل حملا على محله القريب كما في الرضي هذا اخر ما اوردناه من الاعراب على اظهار الاسرار بعون الملك الستار ... اللهم اجعله خالصا لوجهك الكريم ... وصلى الله علي سيدنا محمد الذي ارسل رحمة للعالمين وعلى اله واصحابه اجمعين وعلى جميع الانبياء والمرسلين والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي رفع داء الجهل عنا بانزال قرآن عربي بين الهدى علينا ونصب اطباء العلماء بيننا بمحض لطفه واحسانه وكرمه لنا ... اما بعد فيقول الراجي من ربه الحسنى والزيادة حسين ابن احمد الشهير بزين زاده غفر ذنوبهما وستر عيوبهما لما كان كتاب اظهار الاسرار للشيخ محمد البركي بديع الفضل في الاعصار منطويا على حقائق المباحث المعربية ومحويا على دقائق الاسرار الادبية ... سألني بعض الاخوان ... ان اكتب عليه اعرابا لا يغادر صغيرا ولا كبيرا الا احصاه ... فاجبتهم متضرعا الى من هو عليه هين يسير ... وسميته بحل اسرار الاخيار على اعراب اظهار الاسرار ..."', 'Title from opening on p.5.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the commentary by Ḥusayn ibn Aḥmad Zaynīʻzade on Iẓhār al-asrār, the work of Arabic grammar by Birgivî (Birgili, Birkawī) Mehmet Efendi.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 136', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.146, transcription finished 972 [1564 or 5]. Name of copyist has been rendered virtually illegible.', 'Accompanying materials: Slip with notes and exercises inserted after back flyleaf (paginated pp.149-150).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 81. Explanations of Irab an kawaid." ; "٥٩٩" on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Limp covers in brown leather (goat?) with spine in tan leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; linings in laid paper ; sewn in pink [?] thread, two stations ; worked endbands in light blue and cream, headband entirely gone, tailband in fair condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, water damage, etc. ; housed in envelope.', 'Support: European laid paper with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal) ; anchor in circle watermark (star above?) ; sturdy, thick and well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords and notabilia (side-heads) rubricated ; textual divders in the form of inverted commas ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh with influence of nastaʻlīq (talik) ; virtually serifless ; mainly closed counters ; slight effect of words descending to baseline ; elongation of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 15-17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 6V (60), V+1 (71), 1 (72), i ; chiefly quinions ; lacks proper catchwords, but last word of final line on the verso of each leaf is usually repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and insert following back flyleaf).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "وقد وقع الفراغ من كتابة هذه الاوراق بقدرة العالي الخلاق على يد ... بن مولانا حسين بن محمد المحتاج الى رحمة خالق الخلائق في يوم الميثاق ... سنة ٩٧٢"', 'Explicit: "ولقد احسن المصنف ... في ربط الخاتمة اذا علق في الفاتحة الاقتفاء جادت الصواب وفي الخاتمة الكافية بالتأمل تأمل هذا اخر ما يتيسر لنا ايراده لحمد الله ومنه"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي رفع اسماء العلماء ... وبعد فيقول العبد المحتاج الى ربه الغني ابو الثناء احمد بن محمد الملتجئين الى لطفه الخفي ان المختصر الموسوم بالقواعد للامام الهمام ابن هشان ... لما كان قليل الحجم في المقدار جليل السهم في اثار ... سألني بعض الاخوان في الطريق واخلص الخلان في المضيق عند قراءته على ان اشرحه شرحا يبين التقسيمات في القواعد ويرفع النقاب عن وجوه مخدرات الامثلة والشواهد ... فضممتها في ضمن ذلك العقد القليل حتى كاد يقال انه كتاب لا يحتاج الى المغني بل يشفى العليل وسميته بحل معاقد القواعد ..."', 'Title from opening on p.6.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Shams al-Dīn Abū al-Thanāʼ Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad al-Zīlī al-Shamsī's (d.1600) commentary on Ibn Hishām's (d.1360) grammatical treatise on inflection and the Arabic sentence."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 433', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely 19th century as suggested by paper, cover, date in seal impression, etc.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in painted lacquerwork with spine in black leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in painted lacquerwork ; doublure hinges in black leather ; upper and lower covers in painted lacquerwork of nearly identical composition consisting of swirling floral vegetal pattern of carnations, poppies, etc. in bronze on a field of olive green bordered in a floral vegetal pattern in gold on a wide band of black, flanked by bands of bronze ; upper and lower doublures in painted work of nearly identical composition consisting of floral vegetal pattern in green, pink, and yellow, outlined in gold on a field of red ; entire panel is bordered in a series of gold bands ; sewn in lime green, yellow, and dark blue (or black) thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in light green and yellow ; in fair condition with some cracking, crazing, and loss of laquer ; upper board split and delaminating ; doublure hinges cracked and split ; abrasion.', 'Support: non-European laid paper (likely Persian) ; quite transluscent, crisp and grey in tone ; no chain lines visible ; laid lines quite distinct, mainly oriented horizontally but occasionally vertically, spaced roughly 11-12 laid lines per cm. ; flyleaves in European laid paper, watermark eagle with "E A F" ; one of back flyleaves in wove paper ; many loose quires and dog-eared pages with some blocking due to moisture damage and tacky ink.', 'Decoration: Textual dividers in the form of three inverted commas ; gold cloud-bands and other accents surrounded basmalah and between two columns on incipit and facing page ; frame consisting of a gold band outlined in black fillets and outermost blue fillet surrounds the written area ; thin gold bands outlined in black fillets demarcate the columns within the written area and border the margin ; text partially rubricated with some section headings, portions of the gloss, textual dividers, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; large clear Persianate hand ; mainly serifless with occasional left-sloping head serifs appearing on alif and lam of definite article ; mainly closed counters ; strong vertical character (somewhat elongated in vertical) ; occasional superscripting of letters and words ; some swooping tails ; fully vocalized in same ink ; gloss in a entirely different hand ; script more of a shikastah-nastaʻlīq with characteristic descent of words to baseline, elongated horizontal strokes, and characteristic long final yāʼ, etc.', 'Layout: Written in roughly 14 lines per page plus lines of the gloss which vary widely ; single column divided to two column to set off poetry ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, IV+2 (10), II (14), 2 IV(30), 2+IV (40), 11 IV(128), 2+II (134), ii ; chiefly quaternions ; several blanks left between verses, likely for rubricated headings ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil Western numerals supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "كانما لبست او البست فنكا فقلصت من حواشيه عن السوق قد تم"', 'Incipit: "لو كنت من مازن لم تستبح البى بنو اللقيطة من ذهل بن شيبانا اذا لقام بنصرى معشر خشن عند الحفيظة ان ذولوثة لانا"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from opening on fol.1b.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the famous anthology of poetry collected by Abū Tammām with a partial gloss in Persian.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 450', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at close of Saddi Iskandariĭ on p.530, copied by ʻAbd al-Salām ibn ʻAbd al-Ṣamad al-Marghīnānī al-Kāshgharī with transcription completed 16 Rajab 890 [ca. 29 July 1485] in Herat. Statement at close of Sabʺai saĭër (here entitled Haft paykar) on p.654 indicates completion in Ramaḍān 889 [September-October 1484].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with notes in pencil on dating and copyist [from colophon on p.530] (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Turquoise-tinted scrap with ḥadīth of the Prophet regarding inscription of the basmalah "قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم من كتب بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم وجوده فله الجنة صدق حبيب رب العالمين" (paginated pp.3-4) -- c. Recycled slip with notes (likely in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas) on paper types and papermaking, "Devlet Shah", etc. (paginated pp.5-6).', 'Former shelfmark: "504 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis" in pencil at close on p.654 ; "٨٩" in black ink on tail edge of text block.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; doublures in red-brown leather with elongated central mandorla and cornerpieces in delicate filigree appliqué over blue paper as well as gold-tooled accents and border ; upper and lower covers carry gold-stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition reminiscent of Déroche class NSh 1), pendants, and cornerpieces as well as gold-painted accents and border in blind rules and a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and cream, tab extending from spine leather (repair) protects headband, losses to tailband though core and primaries remain ; overall in somewhat poor condition with flap lost, abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, delamination of boards, opening leaf affixed to upper doublure, etc. ; repair to spine (rebacked) in brown leather.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly distinct, some curving) and chain lines in pairs occasionally visible (see p.32, etc.), cloudy formation, somewhat thin, transluscent and crisp though dense and sturdy, cream color, well-sized and burnished ; staining and tidelines.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece at opening of each mesnevi (see incipit page of opening work and pp.108, 258, 348, 532), rectangular with central scalloped cartouche or lozenge carrying the title in gold (or black) set in a swirling arabesque (in gold, green or red), surrounded by further delicate arabesques (in green-blue and red on gold ground or gold on light blue ground) ; written area surrounded by gold frame defined by black fillets and outermost blue rule, divisions within defined by narrow gold bands ; headings and keywords rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless with characteristic descent of words to baseline and superscripting of final words and letters ; elongation of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page with written area divided to four columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV (8), IV+1 (17), 3 IV(41), IV+1 (50), 9 IV(122), II (126), III+1 (133), 4 IV(165), IV-2 (171), IV-1 (178), 10 IV(258), II+1 (263), 7 IV(319), III (325) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips opening leaf now affixed to upper doublure and includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "توكاندى بنجشنبه كونى رجب آيى ينينك اون آلتى سيندا تاريخ سيكزيوز توقسان دا فى دار السلطنه هراة حميت عن الآفات بيتكجى سى عبد السلم ابن عبد الصمد المرغينانى ثم الكاشغرى غفر الله ذنوبهما وستر عيوبهما امين يا رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "بسم الله الحرمن الرحيم رشته غه چكتى نجه دريتيم ..."', "Title from ownership statements inscribed on incipit page at opening and 'title page' of each mesnevi.", 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant early copy of the five mesnevis of Mir Ali Şîr Nevâî (d.1501), including Ḣaĭratul-abror (حيرت الابرار / Ḥayrat al-abrār), Farhād va Shīrīn (فرهاد و شيرين, entitled Khusraw va Shīrīn in headpiece, see p.108), Laĭli va Mazhnun (ليلى و مجنون / Laylī va majnūn), Saddi Iskandariĭ (سد اسكندرى / Sadd-i Iskandarī, here entitled Iskandarnāmah, see pp.347-8) and Sabʺai saĭër (سبعه سياره / Sabʻa-yi sayyār, here entitled Haft paykar, see pp.531-2).'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Three crescents; initials PP/FVF in roman. For the first see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Calculations rubricated.', 'Date in headings of pages.', 'Described inside cover as a "first draft of a calendar," this piece includes calculations for the visibility of the lunar crescent at the beginning of each of the Islamic months for the year 1209 [i.e. 1794-5] and for a lunar eclipse on 15 Rajab of that year [i.e. 5 February 1795].'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 150', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.397, copied by Muṣṭafá ibn Khiḍr [?]. Colophon lacks year transcription was completed ; paper suggests early 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Slip carrying notes (paginted pp.21-22).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 71. Hasan Chelebi\'s glosses on the Mutawwal." ; "۲٤" on verso of front flyleaf (p.2) and \'title page\' (p.3) ; "٤١٦" on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (orange-red, blue, yellow) with spine, foreedge flap, and edges/turn-ins in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; upper pastedown in laid paper, lower board lining in pink-tinted laid paper ; interior of envelope flap in marbled paper ; sewn in cream thread, two and four stations (alternating) ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, some lifting and losses of paper and leather, staining, delamination of boards, etc. ; repairs in red leather.', 'Support: European laid paper in several types ; first type with 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-30 mm. apart (horizontal), anchor in circle watermark with trefoil above (compare Heawood 2), quite thick, sturdy and well-burnished ; second type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27 mm. apart (horizontal), crossbow in circle watermark with trefoil above (compare Piccard 123860 and 123861), thinner but sturdy and well-burnished ; next type with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), crown with star and crescent above watermark (compare Heawood 1132), thick, sturdy and well-burnished ; final type with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27-28 mm. apart, angel in circle watermark with flower/leaf above ; some staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Keywords rubricated ; overlining in red ; occasional textual dividers in red and black.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) and naskh, several hands ; mainly naskh-nastaʻlīq virtually serifless with mainly closed counters, effect of tilt to the right, slight effect of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), elongation of horizontal strokes, final nūn occasionally reversed (re-curved) ; naskhs fairly compact with mainly closed counters, rounded and freely ligatured, some with tilt to the right others to the left (see pp.283-306 and pp.347-370).', 'Layout: Written in 23, 25 and 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 8 V(80), II (84), 4 V(124), IV (132), IV+1 (141), VI (153), V (163), IV+2 (173), 2 VI (197), I (199) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf and insert ; skips two pages each between pp.265-266 and pp.271-272).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم هذا الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب في ليلة يوم الثلثاء في شهر المرجب عن يد عبد الضعيف الشيخ مصطفى بن خضر [؟] غفر الله له ولوالديه"', 'Explicit: "والتذكير للاحكام المذكورة في علمي المعاني والبيان انما لم يتعرض للبديع لكونه خارجا عن [البلاغة]"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي الهمنا حقائق المعاني ودقائق البيان الاقرب الى الفهم ان المراد بالالهام في هذا المقام معناه اللغوي وهو الاعلام مطلقا لا يحتاج ارادة ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Ḥasan ibn Muḥammad Shāh al-Fanārī's (Hasan Çelebî) gloss on al-Sharḥ al-muṭawwal, the longer commentary by Masʻūd ibn ʻUmar al-Taftazānī on Talkhīṣ al-Miftāḥ by Jalāl al-Dīn al-Qazwīnī (d.1338), an abridgment of part 3 of Miftāḥ al-ʻulūm by al-Sakkākī (d.1229), on rhetoric (al-maʻānī wa-al-bayān)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 37', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, hand, etc. would suggest late 18th or early 19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Inserted slip, laid paper with notes in black ink (between pp. 278-279).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 121. Hasan Chelebi\'s commentary on al-Mawaqif" ; "٣٦٢" in black ink on tail edge of text block.', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in orange-tinted paper with edges / turn-ins in dark brown leather (paper-faced, leather-edged, framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in an untinted paper ; scalloped edge on inner joint of fore edge / envelope flap ; sewn in cream colored thread, two stations, mainly intact ; endbands lacking ; overall in fairly good condition ; repairs to hinges on envelope flap in red straight grain leather ; possibly recycled, with boards narrower than text block, fore edge flap ill-fitting (too wide for the current thickness of the text block), text block badly trimmed at tail.', 'Support: European laid paper of perhaps two types ; one type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25 mm. apart (horizontal) ; another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23 mm. apart (horizontal) ; burnished ; watermarks include lion passant guardant (see p.4, 6, 18, etc.) and "CV" or "GA" (see p.10).', 'Decoration: Keywords (قوله, etc.) and some notabilia rubricated ; some annotations in green ink.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) ; several hands ; opening hand serifless with leftward slant, fairly straight ascenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, lām-alif mukhaffafah ; from p.49 a hand partially seriffed with head-serif on initial lām, inclination to the left, drooping descenders, curved ascenders, lām-alif mukhaffafah ; from p.129 a hand serifless with vertical strokes for paired dots, closed counters, shading, indication of tanwīn, final yāʼ of على mardūdah, lām-alif mukhaffafah ; from p.395 again opening hand.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V (10), III (16) , 7 IV (72), III +1 (79), 11 IV (167), III (173), 3 IV (197), V (207), II (211), 2 IV (227) ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; possible foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, appears in upper outer corner of the recto of many leaves (see p.61, 63, 77, 79, etc.), somewhat haphazard ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "قوله واذا على مما علم البعيد فان قلت العلم باللازم انما يلزم اذا تصور الملزوم قصدا ويكون العلم به تاما بالمعنى الذي تعرفه و ح [وحينئذ] نقول العلم الثالث انما يلزم اذا كان"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذى تولهت الافهام فى كبرياء ذاته وتحيرت الاوهام فى عظمة صفاته ... اما بعد فاعلموا معاشر طلاب اليقين سلام عليكم لا نبتغى الجاهلين ان اصحاب العقل متطابقون ... ثم شرح المواقف من بين كتبه للمولى المحقق واكبر المدقق جامع المعقول والمنقول قرة عين القبول السيد الشريف عامله الله بلطفه اللطيف كتاب اعترف ... ولقد طال ما جال في صدري ان اكتب عليه حواشي يزيل صعابه و يكشف عن وجوه فريدة نقابه ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the gloss of Ḥasan Chalabī (d.1481) on al-Jurjānī’s (d.1413) commentary on the work of al-Ījī (d. 1355?), al-Mawāqif fī ʻilm al-kalām, on scholastic theology. Description provided mainly by Sarah Mirza.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 594', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.129, transcription completed 19 Shaʻbān 1208 [ca. 22 March 1794]. Date composition completed given as 1141 [1728 or 9].', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (paginated pp.1-2).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 94" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in block-printed paper (floral vegetal design in blue and red with white dots on a bright orange ground) with dark red and bright red leathers over spine, fore edge flap, and edges / turn-ins (framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; sewing mainly gone, stab sewn ; overall in somewhat poor condition with much abrasion, some lifting and losses of paper and leather, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper ; one type with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 30 mm. apart (horizontal), and grapes on stem watermark (see p.60, 61, etc.), thin and transluscent, crisp though sturdy, well-burnished ; another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (horizontal), quadraped (lion?) watermark (see p.124, 125, etc.) and "M M" countermark (in p.122) ; some leaves possibly tinted a faint blue ; some pigment burn (even breakthrough in opening leaf).', 'Decoration: Written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by gold frame, elsewhere written area surrounded by red rule-border ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine, compact Turkish hand ; partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serif mainly on lām of definite article, effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes or conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 8 IV(64), i ; exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," reads "بالله وفقنا لختمه في سنة احد واربعين بعد الالف والمائة اللهم انفعنا به والطلبة العلوم" ; "Scribal," reads "تمت هذه الرسالة السنة ثمان مائتين والف في اليوم الشعبان المبراك تسع عشر م م م"', 'Explicit: "في كل باب اي من حال من الاحوال تمت الرسالة مع شرحه لكن في بعض نسخ المتن وقع بدل قوله وهذا الذي ذكرنا اه هكذا وهذا غاية ما اوردناه في هذا الباب ومن الحق الهام الصواب الحمد لله الذي وفقنا لهذا التأليف بمحض لطفه وكرمه وما توفيقي الا بالله توكلت على الله واليه انيب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي عين البحث علم الاداب وعلم فيه طريق السؤال والجواب ... وبعد فيقول العبد الفقير الى عفو ربه القدير الشيخ محمد بن حسين بن محمود السينوبي مولدا الادرنوي موطنا ... لما رأيت هذا الكتاب للمؤمن المحقق ... احمد المشتهر بين الافاضل باسم طاش كبرى ... مرغوبا بين المحققين ومتداولا بين المحصلين وقع [ومع] ذلك كان بعض المواضع منه مشكلا على المتعلمين ... اردت مع قلة بضاعتي بل عدم استطاعتي ان اكتب حاشية موضحة بجميع عباراته ... وسميتها بالحاشية العونية على الرسالة الطاش الكبرى ..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf (p.3).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the gloss by Muḥammad ibn Ḥusayn ibn Maḥmūd al-Sīnūbī al-Adirnawī (Mehmet b. Hüseyin b. Mahmut Sînobî Edirnevî) upon the treatise on disputation (ādāb al-baḥth) by Taşköprüzade (Taşköprülüzade) İsamettin Ahmet Efendi (d.1561).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 631', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, hand, etc. would suggest perhaps 15th or 16th century for some sections, with other sections likely replacements perhaps 16th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Two inventory cataloguing slips in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and fore edge flap label, "IL 95a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip) ; from inner front cover date stamp "22 Jull 1906."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in comb marbled paper (in salmon, blue, yellow, etc.) with dark red leather over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins (marbled paper faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in yellow laid paper with watermark of three hats (top hats with feathers, resembling tea cups) ; sewn in brown thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in light blue and yellow, tailband gone though headband remains in good condition ; overall in fair condition with some staining and abrasion, losses to lower corner of spine, etc.', "Support: non-European and European laid paper of several types ; mainly a type (likely Arab) with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines (vertical) grouped in threes with 11-13 mm. between chains and 33 mm. between groups, sturdy, well-burnished and quite smooth ; another type with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (vertical), and bull's head watermark (see p.180, etc.) ; still another European type with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 25-27 mm. apart (vertical) and anchor in circle watermark (see p.406, etc.), quite sturdy ; some leaves tinted light blue or yellow.", 'Decoration: Keywords and some abbreviation symbols rubricated ; some overlining in red ; textual divders in the form of disc, inverted comma, and hāʼ in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) and naskh ; several elegant Turkish hands ; opening hand (through p.178 and then from pp.207-287) nastaʻlīq (talik), serifless, with effect of tilt to the right, very slight effect of words descending to baseline, contrast in thickness between vertical and horizontal strokes, some elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, etc. ; hand of next and other sections (see pp.179-206, pp.287-326, 367-386) naskh, a few compact Turkish hands, serifless, with effect of tilt to the left, closed counters, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, etc. ; toward close (pp.327-366, 387 to close) again nastaʻlīq (talik), two other hands, serifless, with slight effect of tilt to the right, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled ; some marginalia in decorative shapes, artistically arranged.', 'Collation: V-1 (9), 8 V(89), VII (103), 8 V(183), IV (191), I (193), V (203), III (209) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "والتذكير للاحكام المذكورة في علمي المعاني والبيان انما لم يتعرض للبديع لكونه خارجا عن البلاغة تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب واليه المرجع والمآب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي شرح صدور ارباب الاذهان لايضاح معان الكلم ببديع البيان ... الهمنا حقائق المعاني والدقائق البيان الاقرب الى الفهم ان المراد بالالهام في هذا المقام معناه اللغوي وهو الاعلام مطلقا لا يحتاج ارادة ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Ḥasan ibn Muḥammad Shāh al-Fanārī's (Hasan Çelebî) gloss on al-Sharḥ al-muṭawwal, the longer commentary by Masʻūd ibn ʻUmar al-Taftazānī on Talkhīṣ al-Miftāḥ by Jalāl al-Dīn al-Qazwīnī (d.1338), an abridgment of part 3 of Miftāḥ al-ʻulūm by al-Sakkākī (d.1229), on rhetoric (al-maʻānī wa-al-bayān). Includes preamble."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 116', "Origin: Authorial colophons indicate dates of composition for each of the two works by Bihishtī. As appears in authorial colophon on p.111, compilation and composition of Bihishtī's Ḥāshiyah ʻalá Ḥāshiyat al-Khayālī completed 18th Rajab 949 [ca. 28 October 1542]. As appears in authorial colophon on p.176, compilation/composition of Bihishtī's Ḥāshiyah ʻalá Sharḥ Masʻūd al-Rūmī completed in 959 [1551 or 1552]. Lacks dated scribal colophon ; paper likely suggests late 16th century.", 'Accompanying materials: Slips carrying notes (paginated pp.63-64 and pp.123-124).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 106. Supercommentary on Risalah fi adab il-bahth." ; "۳٧٥" on tail edge of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards now covered in bright orange coated and textured paper (embossed with scrolling vegetal designs), with brown leather over spine, fore-edge, and edges/turn-ins ; Type II binding (with flap) ; envelope flap and board linings in laid paper ; hinges in brown leather ; interior of envelope flap in faded marbled paper with blind stamped rosette in same brown leather ; sewn in cream thread, two stations, with occasional reinforcements sewn in pink thread ; only traces of endbands remain ; in poor condition with much lifting and tearing of paper, pest damage, staining, abrasion, delamination of boards, fore-edge flap ill-fitting, etc. ; repairs in cloth and textured tape.', "Support: European laid paper mainly of two types ; first and second works on a European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain line spaced roughly 31 mm. apart (horizontal), and anchor in circle (with leaf above) watermark, quite thick with some inclusions ; final work on a thinner European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 32-33 mm. apart (horizontal), and bull's head (with eyes and double line above) watermark ; flyleaves in other European laid papers.", 'Decoration: Keywords, abbreviation symbols, and notabilia rubricated ; textual divders in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; likely two hands, with first two works supplied in one hand, and final work supplied in another hand ; virtually serifless ; mainly closed counters ; slight effect of tilt to the right and of words descending to baseline ; some exaggeration in thickness of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 2 V(20), IV+1 (29), 1 (30), 2 V(50), II (54), 2 V(74), V+1 (85), V (95), II (99), ii ; chiefly quinions ; final word of last line on verso repeated at opening of first line on following recto ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and inserts and mistakenly skips two pages between pp.147-148).', 'Incipit: [Ḥāshiyah ʻalá Ḥāshiyat al-Khayālī] "الحمد لله المتكلم بالكلام وعلى رسوله الصلوة والسلام ... وبعد فيقول اضعف عباد الله القوي رمضان بن محسن الويزوي" ; [Ḥāshiyah ʻalá Sharḥ Masʻūd al-Rūmī] "الحمد لله حمد العاكفين ببابه والصلوة على محمد سيد احبابه ..." ; [Sharḥ Arbaʻīn ḥadīthan] "الحمد لله رب العالمين ... وبعد فقد روينا عن علي بن ابي طالب رضي [الله عنه] ان رسول الله ع م قال من حفظ على امتى اربعين حديثا من امر دينها بعثه الله تعالى يوم القيامة من زمرة الفقهاء والعلماء ... فامتثلت الاشارة العالية في جمع اربعين حديثا ... الحديث الاول السلام قبل الكلام ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from inscriptions on front flyleaf (p.1) and opening of each text.', 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.177-p.201 : [Sharḥ Arbaʻīn ḥadīthan] / Kemalpaşazade.', '3. p.116-p.176 : Ḥāshiyah ʻalá Sharḥ Masʻūd al-Rūmī / Ramaḍān ibn ʻAbd al-Muḥsin Bihishtī.', '2. p.112-p.115 : [originally left blank].', '1. p.6-p.111 : Ḥāshiyah ʻalá Ḥāshiyat al-Khayālī / Ramaḍān ibn ʻAbd al-Muḥsin Bihishtī.', "Fine copy of two glosses by Ramaḍān ibn ʻAbd al-Muḥsin al-Wayzawī, al-shahīr bi-Bihishti (al-Wazīrī al-Bihishtī in GAL, d. 979/1571-2), the first a supergloss on the gloss of al-Khayālī upon al-Taftāzānī's commentary on al-ʻAqāʼid al-Nasafīyah and the second a gloss upon the commentary by Kamāl al-Dīn Masʻūd al-Shirwānī al-Rūmī (d. 905/1499) on al-Samarqandī's (13th c.) treatise on disputation, Risālah fī ādāb al-baḥth, followed by a treatise by Kemalpaşazade (Ibn Kamāl) on forty hadith."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 929', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon, though likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and eventually bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974). Likely in the hand of the glossator "ا ع" who apparently executed other manuscripts eventually bound for Heyworth-Dunne, namely Isl. Ms. 905 (completed in 1939), Isl. Ms. 910, Isl. Ms. 937 (completed in 1934), Isl. Ms. 981, Isl. Ms. 988, and Isl. Ms. 998.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 78', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "حشاية | على متن | الاشارات | ابن سينا| J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Wove paper of at least two different types.', 'Decoration: Opening sections entirely in blue ink ; elsewhere matn in black or blue ink and glosses rubricated (see pp.100, 102, 130-150) ; in final sections both matn and glosses in red (from pp.103-107, 109-130, 151 to close).', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a thin to medium line (varies) ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Highly variable, though with matn in central written area ranging from 11-19 lines per page and glosses arranged in margins.', "Collation: Pages between sections left fully or partially blank, some serving as section 'title pages' (see pp.21, 57, 109, 153) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: [matn al-Ishārāt] "شئ للبصر مكافحة حتى يشاهد صورة الغيب مشاهدة"', 'Incipit: [matn al-Ishārāt] "هذه اشارات الى اصول وتنبيهات على جمل يستبصر بها من تيسر له لا ينتفع بالاصرح منها من تعسر عليه والتكلان على من بيده التوفيق ..." ; [Ḥāshiyah ʻalá matn al-Ishārāt] "الاشارة اسم المسألة تحتاج الى دليل والتنبيه اسم لما هو بخلاف ذلك والاصول القوانين الكلية التي يتعرف منها احكام جزئياتها ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of Ibn Sīnā\'s (d.1037) al-Ishārāt wa-al-tanbīhāt with glosses (ending arround p.158) attributed on the \'title pages\' for the various sections to the anonymous "اع", apparent copyist of Isl. Mss. 905, 910, 937, 981, 988, 998 (see pp.1, 21, 57, 109, 153).'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Scrollwork, three hats. For the latter, see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), nos. 2593 and 2597.', 'Rubrication absent; marginal corrections in hand of copyist.', "Date, name of copyist, place of employment and employer's name, and provenance in colophon: qad waqaʻa al-farāgh ʻan taḥrīrihi wa-taswīd fī yawm al-ithnayn min ākhir shahr Muḥarram al-ḥarām li-sanat sitt wa-ʻishrīn wa-miʻah wa-alf [15 February 1714] tamma ʻalá yad afqar al-wará Muḥammad ibn ʻAlī ... fī al-madrasah Sayf Bulandī fī madīnat Anqarah fī khidmat al-Qāsim Afandī.", 'For another copy of this text see Mich. Isl. Ms. 817,2.', '"Ḥāshīyah on the commentary of Qāḍī Zādah on al-Jighmīnī\'s Mulakhkhaṣ," a treatise on theoretical astronomy (hayʼah). David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (winona Lake, 1986), pp. 158-9.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 115', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; paper and date in what appears to be authorial colophon on p.137 (1090, i.e. 1679 or 1680) suggest early 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Slip with notes (paginated pp.117-118).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 8. Glosses (Hashiyah) on Al-Iji\'s work on dialectics."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in marbled paper (in shades of salmon, blue, and yellow) with hinges in a different marbled paper ; upper and lower covers bear large blind-stamped scalloped mandorla with gold-painted accents, filled with floral vegetal composition (compare Déroche class. OAi 8) and accompanied by border in tooled and gold-painted fillets ; design continues with rosette and border on envelope flap ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; worked endbands in white and pink, good condition ; overall in poor condition with paper label applied over upper cover design, some abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather (at board corners and fore-edge flap in particular), fore-edge flap completely detached from lower cover, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of perhaps two types ; mainly with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal) ; thick and well-burnished ; crown with star and crescent above watermark (compare Heawood 1133) and countermark with initials and trefoil above ; some staining.', 'Decoration: Keywords (such as قوله), section headings, and some notabilia rubricated ; a few textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh, two main hands ; opening work in naskh, a fine, clear and compact Ottoman hand ; virtually serifless ; effect of tilt to the left ; many open counters ; kāf mashkūlah (masqūqah) preferred ; freely ligatured with pointing for many final letters assimilated with the letters themselves (see final nūn, fāʼ, etc.) ; remaining works in a naskh showing more influence of nastaʻlīq ; virtually serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline ; extension of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 6 V(60), IV (68), 3 V(98), IV (106) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaves and insert, mistakenly skips two pages between pp.103-104 and repeats pp.117-118 twice).', 'Colophon: [Ḥāshiyat al-Chillī ] "Authorial," rectangular, reads: "تمت الحاشية الواقعة على مير ابي الفتح المنسوبة الى ابن مائى المشهور بچلى زاده في بلدة قسطنطنية في مدرسة ابراهيم پاشا في شهر رمضان المبارك سنة ۱۰۹۰"', 'Explicit: "فصار الكل مضاعفا وهو اثنان وثلثون الوفا وستمائة واربعون احتمالا تمت رسالة حمدية تم تم تم"', 'Incipit: [Ḥāshiyat al-Chillī] "يا من وفقنا لاداب البحث والمناظرة في الكلام وعصمنا من الخلل والتصور في تجريد [كذا] المدعى والمرام ... وبعد فيقول الفقير الى الله الغني عمر بن احمد الشهير بالچلي ان الحاشية الفتحية في الاداب لما كانت لدقتها متوارية عن الاذهاب ولتحجيبها عن العثور مفتقرة الى الايضاح والبيان ... فضمت اليه ما يتمم به النقصان ..." ; [Ḥāshiyat ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Kurdī] "نحمدك يا من فتح الابواب للمتفرع السائل ... وبعد فهذه حاشية لطيفة يليق ان تكتب باقلام الذهب على صحائف الفضة للفاضل المرحوم عبد الرحمن ... على الحواشي المنسوبة الى المحقق ابي الفتح الامير ... على شرح الرسالة العضدية للشيخ محمد الحنفي ... فكانت غير مدونة فجمعتها للاخوان الطلاب بعون الله الوهاب ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '6. p.213-p.214 : [blank].', '5. p.209-p.212 : Risālah ḥamdīyah / Minkarizade Yahya Efendi.', '4. p.205-p.209 : Risālat Shāh Ḥusayn lil-Risālah al-Ḥanafīyah / ʻAbd al-Laṭīf Shāh Ḥusayn ʻAjamī [?].', '3. p.140-p.205 : [Ḥāshiyat ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Kurdī ʻalá al-Ḥāshiyah al-Fatḥīyah fī al-ādāb] / ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Kurdī.', '2. p.138-p.139 : [blank].', '1. p.6-p.137 : [Ḥāshiyat al-Chillī ʻalá al-Ḥāshiyah al-Fatḥīyah fī al-ādāb] / ʻUmar ibn Aḥmad al-Māʼī al-Chillī.', "Fine copy of the superglosses by ʻUmar ibn Aḥmad al-Chillī (fl. 17th cent.) and ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Kurdī on al-Ḥāshiyah al-Fatḥīyah by Abū al-Fatḥ Muḥammad ibn Amīn al-Ardabīlī (d.1543), itself a gloss upon al-Risālah al-Ḥanafīyah by Muḥammad al-Tibrīzī al-Ḥanafī (d.1494), a commentary on al-Ījī’s (d.1355) Risālat ādāb al-baḥth wa-al-munāẓarah, a work on dialectics. Followed by two brief treatises, Risālat Shāh Ḥusayn lil-Risālah al-Ḥanafīyah, perhaps another gloss on al-Tibrīzī al-Ḥanafī's commentary by ʻAbd al-Laṭīf Shāh Ḥusayn ʻAjamī (d.1514 or 5) [?] and Risālah ḥamdīyah attributed to Minkarizade Yahya Efendi."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 110', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests late 18th or early 19th century.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 159. Glosses on al-Risalat al-adudiyah." ; "۳" on interior of upper cover and \'title page\' (p.1) ; "٥٢٠" on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in olive-tinted European laid paper ; upper and lower covers bear blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. NSd 7) along with tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations with primaries, occasionally primaries only ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, minor spine slant (slightly cocked), detached at spine (effectively hollowback), etc. repairs in brown leather.', "Support: European laid paper in a few types ; one type with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal) ; another type with 12-13 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of grapes with small crown above ; another type much lighter in color, with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 17-19 mm. apart (horizontal), watermark of scrollwork with 'C S' ; another type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 30 mm. apart (horizontal), and three hats (top hats) watermark.", 'Decoration: Keywords and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; possibly two hands ; main hand with slight of effect of tilt to the right and words descending to baseline, virtually serifless, mainly closed counters, freely ligatured (point of final nūn very often assimilated with bowl, etc.), alif maqṣūrah mardūdah, and nūn of عن، من، etc. often reversed (re-curved).', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page (beginning around p.118, some lines entered on the diagonal) ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 6 V(60), III+2 (68), 3 V(98), III (104) ; chiefly quinions ; final leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "وبالجملة لا محذور في بقاء الاعم والاخص على ما هو المشهور في تفسيرها"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي ادبنا باداب المناظرين وفتح علينا ابواب البحث المفاكرة ... وبعد فيقول الفقير السيد الكفوى ان العلوم على شعب فنونها وتكثر شحونها ارفع المطالب وانفع المآدب ... ففحصت الكتب المصنفة العضدية وشرحها الفائق على الشروح الدائق وحاشية المشتملة على التحقيقات وهو حسبي ونعم الوكيل قوله الملائم للمسبوق ان الضمير راجع الى الشرح المذكور ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the supergloss by al-Kaffawī (Kefevi, d.1754) on al-Ḥāshiyah al-Fatḥīyah by Abū al-Fatḥ Muḥammad ibn Amīn al-Ardabīlī (d.1543), itself a gloss upon al-Risālah al-Ḥanafīyah by Muḥammad al-Tibrīzī al-Ḥanafī (d.1494), a commentary on al-Ījī’s (d.1355) Risālat ādāb al-baḥth wa-al-munāẓarah, a work on dialectics. Seems to end abruptly with final leaves left blank.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 148', "Origin: As appears in colophons on p.99 and p.209, and in 'title page' inscriptions on p.11, p.103, and p.219, copied by al-Sayyid al-Shaykh Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Muṣṭafá al-Izmīrī. As appears in colophon on p.99, transcription of Ḥāshiyat al-Khiṭāʼī completed in Istanbul (Qusṭanṭīnīyah) 22 Jumādá I 1076 [ca. 30 November 1665]. As appears in colophon on p.209, transcription of Ḥāshiyat ʻAbd Allāh al-Yazdī ʻalá al-Khiṭāʼī, completed in Istanbul (bi-Dār al-Salṭanah al-ʻāliyah) 25 Muḥarram 1076 [ca. 8 August 1665].", 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 13. Glosses on al-Khatai on the Mukhtasar & of Mirza Jan on the former ." ; on tailedge of textblock "٤۱۷".', 'Binding: Pasteboards (semi-limp) covered in marbled paper (red, yellow, blue) with dark brown leather over spine and edges/turn-ins ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in yellow-tinted paper ; sewn in brownish pink thread, two stations ; only traces of endbands remain ; overall in poor condition with abrasion, staining, some lifting of paper and leather, moisture damage, upper cover detaching at spine, label affixed to upper cover, etc. repairs to spine in tan leather.', "Support: European laid paper mainly with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart, and paschal lamb in four-lobed circle watermark (see p.34, 38, 208, 214, 336, etc.) with 'G A' or 'G M' below trefoil countermark (see p.326, 332, etc. and compare Piccard No. 86801) ; a few leaves at opening in laid paper with crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.16 etc.) and 'G T' below trefoil countermark (see p.18, 22, 46, etc.) ; other opening and closing leaves in still a different laid paper with three fleurs-de-lis and fleur-de-lis above scrollwork watermarks ; all well-sized and burnished.", 'Decoration: Keywords and abbreviations symbols rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) ; virtually serifless ; mainly closed counters ; effect of tilt to the right and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated) ; final nūn reversed (re-curved) ; kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred.', 'Layout: Written in 21 and 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: III+1 (7), 4 V(47), III (53), 5 V(103), IV (111), 5 V(161), IV+1 (170) ; chiefly quinions ; opening quire left mainly blank ; several leaves between each work left blank ; final three quires left blank (incomplete) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips first two leaves).', 'Explicit: "ولو سلم ان لها جزءا بناء على كونها مركبة من القدرة على هذا التعبير"', 'Incipit: "نحمدك اللهم على ما اعطتنا من سوابغ النعم وبوالغ الحكم ونصلي على نبيك الهادي للعرب والعجم على وجه اكمل واتم قوله ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on 'title page' (p.11).", 'Ms. codex.', '10. p.271-p.336 : [blank].', '9. p.220-p.270 : Ḥāshiyat Mīrzā Jān ʻalá al-Ḥāshiyah al-Khiṭāʼīyah ʻalá al-Mukhtaṣar / Ḥabīb Allāh Mīrzā Jān al-Shīrāzī.', '8. p.210-p.219 : [blank].', '7. p.104-p.209 : Ḥāshiyat ʻAbd Allāh al-Yazdī ʻalá Ḥāshiyat al-Mukhtaṣar lil-Khiṭāʼī / ʻAbd Allāh ibn al-Ḥusayn al-Yazdī.', '6. p.100-p.103 : [blank].', '5. p.12-p.99 : Ḥāshiyat al-Khiṭāʼī ʻalá al-Mukhtaṣar / ʻUthmān al-Khiṭāʼī Mawlānāzādah.', "4. p.11 : ['title page' for opening work with contents listing, excerpts, and ownership statements].", '3. p.2-p.10 : [blank].', '2. p.1 : [excerpt from Murūj al-dhahab of al-Masʻūdī].', '1. p.[]-p.[] : [blank].', "Clear (though incomplete, ending abruptly) copy of a collection of glosses on the Mukhtaṣar or shorter commentary by Masʻūd ibn ʻUmar al-Taftazānī on Talkhīṣ al-Miftāḥ by Jalāl al-Dīn al-Qazwīnī (d.1338), itself an abridgment of part 3 of Miftāḥ al-ʻulūm by al-Sakkākī (d.1229), on rhetoric (al-maʻānī wa-al-bayān). Opens with al-Khiṭāʼī's glosses, followed by the superglosses of ʻAbd Allāh ibn al-Ḥusayn al-Yazdī (d.1606 or 7) and Mīrzā Jān (d. 1586?) upon al-Khiṭāʼī's glosses."])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Praying figure; hillock with initials FT in roman. For the latter see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), nos. 2610-2616.', 'Contains brief astronomical tables.', 'Text rubricated; text enclosed in red or black borders; copyist same as that of Mich. Isl. Ms. 813,2; corrections and marginal notes in other hands.', 'Pp. [1-5]. Bound with: [2] Tashīl al-ʻibārah fī takmīl mā naqaṣa min al-yasārah, pp. [6-41]; [3] Astronomical treatise, pp. [43-62]; [4] Calendrical work, pp. [66-84]; [5] Fragments in Turkish, pp. [85-90].', 'Fragments on calendar conversion and star observation, including a short calendrical table for Islamic years 1122-1126 [i.e. 1710-1714].'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 608', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.101b copied by Muḥammad ibn Maḥmūd [...?]. Copying finished in the middle of Shaʻbān 942 [February 1536].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slips in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 84" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboard covered in marbled paper (in lavender, blue and white) with light brown leather on the spine and fore-edge flap (nearly half-bound); Type II binding (with flap); intact and likely later than text.', 'Support: non-European laid paper; non-"Mamluk" with slightly curved (wavy), single chain lines running horizontally and separated by roughly 32 cm. ; laid lines running vertically and spaced roughly 8-9 laid lines per cm. (see fol.5 for very clear chain lines); flyleaves of European laid paper with watermark partially visible "AGNANI" [?].', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with words such as "qāla" marking the dialogic relationship between this gloss and text which it is glossing, in red; red overlines and flourishes are also occasionally used.', 'Script: Naskh; very small hand with alifs just under 2 mm. high, having an Eastern and possibly Persian character; lām alifs have a prominent barbed serif on the left-hand ascender; an upward-spiraling hāʼ is used in the colophon (fol. 101b); elongated swooping tails on some final letters; tanwīn al-fatḥah is marked, hamzah and shaddah are not.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 9 V (90), VI-1 (101) (final quire could be V+1 but numerous repairs make it difficult to ascertain; sewing appears after the 6th folio); catchwords present; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (referenced in cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب [...؟] عباد الله محمد بن محمود [...؟] في اواسط شهر شعبان المعظم في سنة اثنين واربعين وتسعمائة"', 'Explicit: "ان التصديق بوجود الموضوع جزء من العلم وهذا الجواب مردود لان الشيخ الرئيس قد صرح في الشفاء بان التصديق بوجود الموضوع من المبادى التصديقية فلا يكون جزء على [...؟] بل مندرجا في المبادى التصديقية"', 'Incipit: " قال ورتبته على مقدمة و[ثلاث] مقالات وخاتمة اقول هكذا وجدنا عبارة المتن في كثير من النسخ والصواب "', "Title from inscription on fol.1a 'titlepage'.", 'Ms. codex.', 'Gloss on the commentary by Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Rāzī Quṭb al-Dīn al-Taḥtānī, (d.766/1365) on al-Risālah al-shamsīyah, a treatise on logic by ʻAlī ibn ʻUmar al-Qazwīnī (d. 675/1276). Description provided by Noah Gardiner.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 459', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper and hand of opening section (through p.226) suggest perhaps 15th century, with paper and hand of final section suggesting late 16th or perhaps early to mid 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.1-2) -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label, "IL 85" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in now dull yellow paper with red leather over spine, traces of fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; board linings in untinted laid European paper (crossbow in circle watermark visible) ; sewn in cream and light pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in cream and beige, fair condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with flap lost, lifting and losses of paper and leather, abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: Opening section on non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines in groups of three with 9-11 mm. between chains and 38 mm. between groups (horizontal, see p.40), cloudy formation, dark cream in color (possibly a second type with 8 laid lines per cm. and chain lines in groups of three with 9 mm. between chains and 47 between groups, see p.90, 176, etc.) ; following section on European laid paper of at least two types ; type with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 30 mm. apart, anchor in circle with six pointed star above watermark (see p.230, 234, 235, etc., compare nos. 61, etc. in Velkov, Les Filigranes dans les documents Ottomans), sturdy and highly burnished to glossy ; another type with 10-11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (horizontal), three hats watermark (see p.261, 269, etc., compare nos.10 and 11 in Velkov), thin, crisp and transluscent, extremely well-burnished ; another type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22-34 mm. apart (horizontal), cross in an inverted tear drop watermark with "I M [?]" below (compare Heawood 964, etc.) ; some ink burn.', 'Decoration: Keywords rubricated (in latter 18th century section, pp.226-327).', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq and naskh ; three or more hands ; opening through p.226 mainly in a naskh with influence of nastaʻlīq, serifless with effect of tilt to the right, slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing (where present, quite casual to scarce in some sections) in distinct dots, with a few other hands supplying an occasional passage (see p.8, p.28, p.36, pp.44-46, etc.) ; from p.227 to close, an elegant naskh, mainly serifless with effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders (many dramatically majmūʻah), pointing in distinct or conjoined dots (with two dots typically arranged vertically, one above the other), freely ligatured.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page.', 'Collation: ii, 11 V(110), IV+1 (119), IV (127), 2 V(147), IV (155), V (165), 1 (166) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and flyleaves, mistakenly repeats p.4 and p.6, and skips four pages between pp.261-262 and two pages each between pp.265-266 and pp.267-268).', 'Explicit: "وقد يقال في الاول ايضا نقل من المعنى الحقيقي الذي هو الحائط الا انه لوحظ اولا تم الكتاب بعون الله الوهاب"', 'Incipit: "قال الشيخ جار الله العلامة احسن الله اكرامه في دار المقامة الحمد لله الذي انزل القرآن كلاما مؤلفا منظما وصف الله سبحانه بعد الدلالة على انحصار جنس الحمد بانزال القرآن ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.7).", 'Ms. composite codex.', 'Fine composite copy of al-Jurjānī’s commentary on the first part of al-Kashshāf, the celebrated Qurʼān commentary by Abū al-Qāsim Maḥmūd ibn ʻUmar al-Zamakhsharī, called Jār Allāh (d. 538/1144).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 955', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.169, copied by Muṣṭafá al-Ḥakīm ibn Aḥmad al-Ḥakīm al-Shāfiʻī al-Miṣrī with transcription completed 24 Shaʻbān 1290 [ca. 17 October 1873] likely in Egypt where the copyist was born and resided.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 104', 'Binding: Boards covered in textured black cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "حاشية الدسوقى" ; sewn in white thread, five stations ; overall in good condition with minor abrasion at spine.', 'Support: European (specifically Venetian made by the Galvani firm) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 29-31 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of crescent with face (human profile) in shield (see pp.2, 8, 12, 14, 20, etc.), "A G" (p.90) and "Andrea Galvani Pordenone" (see p.92 and compare Walz, The Paper trade of Egypt and the Sudan, 88-9 and Heawood no.860), sturdy, cream in color, well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Keywords (mainly "قوله") rubricated ; supplied in second and part of third gatherings only (see pp.21-43) ; elsewhere lacuna / spaces left but words never entered.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) ; clear, spacious Egyptian / Turkish hand in a bold line ; serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline, some elongation of horizontal strokes, lām alif ligature often resembling nūn with point assimilated with bowl, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 8 V(80), III (86), i ; quinions and final ternion ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals below large letter kāf, upper outer corner of the recto of the first leaf of each quire ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "ووافق الفراغ من نسخ هذه الحاشية يوم الخميس الموافق اربعة عشرين شعبان الذي هو من سنة ١٢٩٠ تسعين ومائتين والف من هجرة المصطفى صلى الله عليه وسلم على يد افقر العباد واحوجهم الى الله تعالى مصطفى الحكيم بن المرحوم احمد الحكيم الشافعي مذهبا المصري مولودا واقامة غفر الله له ولوالديه ولمشايخه ولاحبابه ولجميع المسلمين بجاه نبي الله امين امين امين امين تم وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم امين"', 'Explicit: "ذو علم واردت به عمرا وهذا اخر ما يسر الله جمعه واسأل الله الكريم المنان ذا الفضل والاحسان ان ينفع به الاخوان وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام على سيدنا محمد سيد المرسلين وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين وبعد فيقول العبد الفقير محمد الدسوقي هذه تقييدات تتعلق بشرح العلامة السمرقندي على الرسالة العضدية استنبطها من تقرير شيخنا العلامة ابي الحسن علي بن احمد الصعيدي العدوي المالكي عليه سحائب الرحمة والرحمن امين ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of the gloss by Muḥammad al-Dasūqī (d.1815) upon the commentary by Abū al-Qāsim ibn Abī Bakr al-Samarqandī (15th cent.) on al-Risālah al-waḍʻīyah, the seminal treatise by ʻAḍud al-Dīn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Aḥmad al-Ījī (d. 1355?) on ʻilm al-waḍʻ.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 114', "Origin: As appears in colophons on p.126 and p.181, transcription of the second and third work finished in 1108 H [1696 or 1697 M]. Copyist for the second and third works may be the author of the statement on the 'title page' (p.1), ʻUmar ibn Muḥammad. All papers suggest 17th century.", 'Accompanying materials: Scrap with notes, etc. (paginated pp.39-40).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 129. Adab al-bahth, with 3 commentaries."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in laid marbled paper (in salmon, yellow, and green) with spine, fore-edge flap, and edges/turn-ins in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; envelope flap in different marbled paper ; sewn in once pink [?] thread, two stations ; worked endbands in red and yellow, fair condition ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, some lifting and losses of leather, envelope flap detaching from fore-edge flap, fore-edge flap ill-fitting (small), some spine slant (slightly cocked), etc.', "Support: European laid paper of roughly three types ; first work supplied on a European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 21-22 mm. apart (horizontal), three circles watermark with initials 'A R' [?] and cross above, only lightly burnished ; second and third works supplied on two papers, one a thick and burnished European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 30 mm. apart (horizontal), and crown-star-crescent watermark (compare Heawood 1133) the other a European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark ; some staining.", 'Decoration: Keywords and abbreviation symbols rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq ; two hands, with first work provided in one hand and second and third works provided in another hand ; both virtually serifless with mainly closed counters and slight effect of words descending to baseline (more exaggerated in second hand) ; some exaggeration in thickness of horizontal strokes (more so in bolder first hand).', 'Layout: Written in 21 and 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V (10), V+1 (21), 4 V(61), I+1 (64), 2 V(84), IV (92) ; chiefly quinions ; leaves left blank between works and at close ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert and skips two pages between pp.33-34).', 'Colophon: [Ḥāshiyat al-Chillī] "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "تمت الحاشية الشريفة لمولانا عمر بن احمد الجلي الامدي [؟] على حاشية الفتحية في الاداب سنة ۱۱۰۸" ; [Ḥāshiyat Minqārīʻzādah] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت الاوراق بعناية الخلاق سنة ۱۱۰۸ م"', 'Incipit: [Ḥāshiyat Ḥamzah Afandī ] "يا محسنا لمن نادب في مقام العبودية بخير الاداب ويا هاديا لمن جاهد في الطاعات سبيل الصواب ... لما كانت الفوائد مشتهرة بين العلماء ... علقت عليها ما يكشف عن وجوه فرائدها ..." ; [Ḥāshiyat al-Chillī] "يا من وفقنا لاداب البحث والمناظرة في الكلام وعصمنا من الخلل والقصور في تحرير المدعى والمرام ... فيقول الفقير الى الله الغني عمر بن احمد الشهير بالچلي ان الحاشية الفتحة في الاداب لما كانت لدلتها متوارية عن الاذهاب ... فضمت اليه ما يتمم به النقصان ..." ; [Ḥāshiyat Minqārīʻzādah] "الحمد لمن رفع قوله من تأدب لاظهار الصواب ... وبعد فيقول الراجي من ربه الفوز بالسعادة يحيى بن عمر المشتهر بمنقاري زاده تحرير التقرير ان صدرت على اداب مذاكرة الرسالة الحنفية وحاشيتها الفتحية في الاداب ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. composite codex.', '6. p.182-p.184 : [blank].', '5. p.130-p.181 : [Ḥāshiyat Minqārīʻzādah ʻalá al-Ḥāshīyah al-Fatḥīyah fī al-ādāb] / Minkarizade Yahya Efendi.', '4. p.127-p.129 : [blank].', '3. p.44-p.126 : [Ḥāshiyat al-Chillī ʻalá al-Ḥāshiyah al-Fatḥīyah fī al-ādāb] / ʻUmar ibn Aḥmad al-Māʼī al-Chillī.', '2. p.42-43 : [blank].', '1. p.1-p.41 : [Ḥāshiyat Ḥamzah Afandī ʻalá al-Ḥāshiyah al-Fatḥīyah fī al-ādāb] / Hamza Efendi.', "Fine copy of three superglosses by Hamza Efendi (d.1712), ʻUmar ibn Aḥmad al-Māʼī al-Chillī (fl. 17th cent.), and Minkarizade Yahya Efendi (d.1678) each on al-Ḥāshiyah al-Fatḥīyah by Abū al-Fatḥ Muḥammad ibn Amīn al-Ardabīlī (d.1543), itself a gloss upon al-Risālah al-Ḥanafīyah by Muḥammad al-Tibrīzī al-Ḥanafī (d.1494), a commentary on al-Ījī's (d.1355) Risālat ādāb al-baḥth wa-al-munāẓarah, a work on dialectics."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 579', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. suggests mid to late 17th or early 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From hinge on upper board and spine label "IL 87" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Fiber boards covered in shell marbled paper (mainly in grey [to lavender], blue, pink with another paper in brown and dark blue at two edges) with red leather over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; no board linings (i.e., interior of boards not lined, hinges and turn-ins only) ; sewn in heavy cream thread, two stations ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and spine leather, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of a few types ; opening type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), three hats over "G C" watermark (see p.4, etc.), thin and transluscent, fairly crisp though sturdy, well-burnished ; another type with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of scrollwork / coat of arms with three bars (see p.48, 58, etc. and compare Armoiries (16) A. Indéterminées dated 1673-1717 in Velkov, Les Filigranes dans les documents Ottomans) ; another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of cross flanked by creatures above two circles (see p.102, etc.), thin and transluscent though sturdy, burnished ; repair (covering hole) at close (see p.128).', 'Decoration: Keywords and abbreviation symbols (signes-de-renvoi, etc.) rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh and nastaʻlīq (talik) ; two clear Turkish hands ; from opening to p.96, a fine naskh, partially but irregularly seriffed with most ascenders occasionally seriffed, marked tilt to the left, slight effect of words descending to baseline, curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes or conjoined dots rather than distinct dots, final nūn usually reversed (recurved) ; from p.96 to close, a bold nastaʻlīq (talik), serifless with slight effect of tilt to the right and of words descending to baseline, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 5 V(50), VII (64) ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (begins with ١٣٦, as though once part of a collective volume) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "فلا حاجة اليهما معا بل [؟] يكفي احدهما فقط لان الشمول"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي تولهت الافهام في كبرياء ذاته وتحيرت الادهام [؟] في عظمة صفاته جل كبريائه في ان يحوم درك العقول ... اما بعد فهذه تعليقات على حاشية شرح المختصر لمولى العلامة ... السيد الشريف ... الفها احوج الخلائق الى رحمة [؟] ربه العالي حسين الحسين الخلخالي ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Clear, well-annotated copy of the supergloss by al-Khalkhālī upon the gloss by ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad al-Jurjānī, al-Sayyid al-Sharīf (d.1413) upon the commentary by ʻAḍud al-Dīn al-Ījī (d.1355?) upon Ibn al-Ḥājib's (d.1249) Mukhtaṣar al-muntahá, an abridgement of his own treatise on law according to the Mālikī school, Muntahá al-suʼāl wa-al-amal fī ʻilmay al-uṣūl wa-al-jadal. Appears to ends abruptly. Likely once part of a collective volume (majmūʻah)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 574', 'Origin: As appears at close on p.146, transcription completed 981 [1573 or 4].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.1-2) -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 95" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip) ; possible former shelfmark on head edge.', "Binding: Pasteboards now covered in layers of laid paper (including manuscript 'waste') with dark red-brown leather over spine and edges/turn-ins ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; board linings in untinted paper (including manuscript 'waste') ; sewn in heavy cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in blue and cream, damaged with significant losses at head and tail ; overall in quite poor condition with flap lost, significant abrasion and staining, lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, etc. ; housed in box for protection.", 'Support: European laid paper ; opening type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 24 and 32-33 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of teardrop shape with cross (see p.16, 17, 110, etc.), transluscent, thin and crisp though sturdy, well-burnished ; another type with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 32-33 mm. apart (horizontal), and hand or glove watermark (possibly with flower above, see p.72, 90, etc.), thicker and sturdier than previous type ; staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Keywords rubricated (from p.55 to close).', 'Script: Naskh with influence of nastaʻlīq (talik) ; clear Turkish hand (possibly more than one) ; serifless with effect of tilt to left or right, slight effect of words descending to baseline, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, freely ligatured.', 'Layout: Written in 17-19 lines per page (layout changes at p.107).', 'Collation: i, 7 V(70) ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Explicit: "في جميع ذلك مع علي رضي الله عنه وعن باقي الصحابة اجمعين مع جميع المسلمين امين تمت تاريخ سنة ٩۸۱"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعل العلم هداية للعالمين وزين به صدور العالمين ... ويقول العبد الضعيف ... يعقوب بن سيد علي ... لما رأيت شرح الاستاذ العلامة ... السيد الشريف الجرجاني ... يحتاج الى حل مواضع مغلقة وكشف مواقع معضلة كتبت هذه الاوراق مستعينا بالملك الخلاق ..."', "Title from inscriptions on front flyleaf (p.5) and 'title page' (p.7).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Clear copy of the gloss by Yaʻqūb ibn Sayyid ʻAlī al-Burūsawī (d.1524) upon the commentary by al-Sayyid al-Sharīf ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad al-Jurjānī (d.1413) on the celebrated work on the law of inheritance by Sirāj al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Sajāwandī (fl. 12th cent.).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 111', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Vast number of slips carrying notes, most tipped in (paginated pp.13-14, pp.17-18, etc.).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 112. Tahdib al-mantik."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in laid paper with red-brown leather on spine, fore-edge flap and edges/turn-ins ; Type II binding (with flap) ; envelope flap covered in pink laid paper ; board linings in laid paper ; initial quires sewn in yellow thread, latter quires in red thread, two stations ; worked endbands in light green and pink, tailband in tact, headband nearly gone ; in poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather and paper (especially spine and fore-edge flap), delamination of boards, lower cover detaching at spine, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; replacement leaves in European laid paper with horn in coat of arms (crown above) watermark (compare Heawood 2654) ; main type carrying opening work a European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (horizontal), and three hats watermark (compare Heawood 2596) ; still another type in European laid paper bears a countermark of initials "A S" with trefoil above ; bulk of second work in European laid paper with crown star crescent watermark (compare Heawood 1132).', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviations rubricated ; diagram on p.495.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq and naskh ; several hands ; virtually serifless ; mainly closed counters ; effect of words descending to baseline, occasionally more exaggerated.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page throughout ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: II (4), V-1 (13), V (23), V-2 (31), 5 V(81), 2 VI (105), V-1 (114), 2 V (134), 2 IV (150), V (160), IV (168), V (178), IV (186), V (196), IV (204), 2 V(224), VI (236), i ; mainly quinions though quinions alternating with quaternions carry second work ; incipit supplied on replacement leaves (initial binion) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes all inserts and back flyleaf, skips two pages between pp.93-94).', 'Incipit: [Ḥāshiyat Mīrzā Jān] "قوله الحكمة استكمال ... الاستكمال مصدر المصادر قد تطلق ويراد بها معانيها النسبية وقد تطلق ويراد بها الحاصل بالمصدر ..." ; [Ḥāshiyat Tahdhīb min al-manṭiq] "الحمد لله على تهذيب المنطق والكلام عن غياهب الشكوك والوهام"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on opening added leaf (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', '3. fol.111b-fol.236b (p.234-p.546) : Ḥāshiyat Tahdhīb min al-manṭiq / Muḥammad ibn Asʻad al-Dawwānī.', '2. fol.111a (p.233) : [blank].', '1. fol.4b-fol. 110b (p8.-p.232) : Ḥāshiyat Mīrzā Jān / Ḥabīb Allāh Mīrzā Jān.', "Clear copy of a gloss by Mīrzā Jān (with superglosses of Ḥasan Chalabī, etc.) upon the commentary by Muḥammad ʻAlī ibn Mubārakshāh al-Bukhārī on Najm al-Dīn ʻAlī ibn ʻUmar al-Kātibī al-Qazwīnī's Ḥikmat al-ʻayn, a work of metaphysics and the natural sciences. Followed by the commentary on the first part al-Taftāzānī's Tahdhīb al-manṭiq, a tract on logic and metaphysics, by Muḥammad ibn Asʻad al-Dawwānī."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 112', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.437, copied by Aḥmad ibn Ḥasan in Erzurum. Transcription finished in Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1212 [May-June 1798].', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 72. Commentary of Kara Daud on Shamsiyah."', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in laid marbled paper (originally in salmon, dark blue, yellow, blue-green, see envelope flap) with spine, fore-edge flap, and edges/turn-ins in red-brown leather (marbled paper faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; sewn in green-blue thread, two stations ; worked endbands in green and yellow, fair condition ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, some lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards (especially at corners), significant spine slant (cocked, especially at head), etc.', 'Support: European laid paper in several types ; one type with 12-13 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced roughly 25 mm. apart (horizontal), lightly burnished ; another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart, watermark of lion passant with crown on head, fairly well-burnished ; another type with 13-14 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 18 mm. apart, watermark with shield/scrollwork of some type, thick and well-burnished ; some staining and leather burn.', 'Decoration: Keywords (mainly قوله) and abbreviations rubricated ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, bold Turkish hand ; mainly serifless but occasional right-sloping serif appears on joined alif ; slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline ; some superscripting of letters and words at the end of a line ; freely ligatured ; bowl of final nūn extends to form a complete circle enclosing its dot ; kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred though occasionally kāf is written as vertical stroke with miniature kāf seated above (effect of the whole being resemblance to hamzah seated on alif) ; final yāʼ mainly mardūdah ; rightward descenders are quite rounded ; final nūn is often reversed (or re-curved).', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, 2 V(20), VI (32), 18 V(212), IV (220) ; chiefly quinions ; final two leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, ends with ٤٢ on p.89 ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "الحمد لله على التمام وعلى رسوله افضل الصلوة والسلام وعلى اله واصحابه الى يوم القيام بوجوه التوفير والاحترام على يد افقر الطلاب واحوجهم الى رحمة الله الملك الوهاب احمد بن حسن غفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه في شهر ذي الحجة في سنة اثنى عشر ومائتين والف من هجرة من اختص بالمحبوبين [؟] لله تعالى بالفرد الشرف [؟] في بلدة ارزة الروم في دائرة احمدية في ايام التحصيل"', 'Explicit: "ويمكن ان يقال اشار رحمة الى الجواب والايراد بقوله فالاولى [ان يقال]"', 'Incipit: "قوله ورتبته على مقدمة وثلث مقالات وخاتمة اعلم ان المصنف [؟] قال فاشار الي من سعد بلطف الحق الى اخر اوصافه ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Qarah Dāwūd's supergloss on al-Jurjānī's gloss upon Quṭb al-Dīn al-Rāzī's (al-Quṭb al-Taḥtānī's) commentary on Najm al-Dīn ʻAlī ibn ʻUmar al-Kātibī al-Qazwīnī's renowned treatise on logic."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 620', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.385, transcription completed 26 [?] Rajab 1010 [ca. 20? January 1602].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label, "IL 96" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in beige laid paper ; fore edge flap lined in purple textile ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition, similar to Déroche class. OSd1) as well as tooled border ; sewn in beige thread, two stations ; only traces of headband remain ; overall in somewhat poor condition with much abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; repairs to spine, fore edge flap, and board edges in red leather.', 'Support: European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-28 mm. apart (horizontal), and possible hand or glove watermark (see p.40, 41, 66, 366, 382, etc.) ; medium cream in color, well-burnished to glossy, sturdy and dense though crisp.', 'Decoration: Some keywords and notabilia (side-heads) rubricated, others in blue ink.', 'Script: Maghribī script ; quite an elegant hand with effect of tilt to the right.', 'Layout: Written in 22 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: 4, V (14), V+1 (25), 5 V(75), VI (87), 4 V(127), V+1 (138), 4 V(178), V+1 (189), II (193) ; chiefly quinions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of al-khamsah al-ghubārīyah in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "كملت الحاشية المباركة بحمد الله وحسن عونه وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله سادس وعشرين من شهر رجب المبارك الفرد من عام عشرة بعد الالف ..."', 'Explicit: "والاوائل والمبادي دون الاواخر والثواني صح قرأة ..."', 'Incipit: "قول السيد الكلام هو اللفظ فان قيل لي [؟] شيء لم يبتدا ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.9).", 'Ms. codex.', '6. p.386 [another excerpt].', '5. p.10-p.385 : Ḥāshiyat Sayyidī Aḥmad al-Qaddūmī ʻalá Sayyidī al-Sharīf [?] / Aḥmad al-Qaddūmī.', '4. p.8-p.9 : [assorted verses and other excerpts].', '3. p.7 : [blank].', '2. p.2-p.6 : [short excerpt with definitions of grammatical terms, opens "وحقيقة النحو علم باصول يعرف بها احوال اواخر الكلم اعرابا وبناء وحقيقة الكلام ما تركب من كلمتين ..."].', '1. p.1 : [assorted excerpts].', '"...[Fine copy of a commentary upon] A treatise or gloss on syntax ; preceded by a short treatise (5 pp.) on the same subject, and two pp. of verses on gender, unidentified..." - from catalog card.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1014', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.524, copied by Muṣṭafá ibn ʻAbd al-Karīm (Mustafa bin Abdülkerim) with transcription of the latter section (al-niṣf al-thānī) completed in 983 [1575 or 6]. As appears in colophon on p.228, transcription of the opening section (and the entire manuscript) completed Rabīʻ II 984 [July 1576]. As explained by the copyist in the colophon for the opening section (p.228), he began the transcription with the second section but was delayed in completing the full work due to difficulty acquiring a copy of the first section from which he could make his copy.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 163', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in deep red leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; lower doublure in brown leather, upper pastedown / flyleaf (now affixed to opening leaf) in pale yellow paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold-painted scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OAi 14) and tooled border in gold and black ; sewn in light-pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in light yellow and light pink, fair condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with significant staining and abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; repairs to spine and board corners in bright red leather, including fill in lower cover.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (20 in 25 mm., horizontal) and chain lines grouped in threes mainly with 9-11 mm. between chains and 32-40 mm. between groups (vertical), 14-17 mm. between chains and 44-52 mm. between groups also observed (see p.32) ; well-sized and burnished to glossy, sturdy, fairly transluscent.', "Decoration: Simple illuminated 'headpiece' (ʻunwān) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece carrying the basmalah in gold tawqīʻ with gold flanking pieces and vocalization and accents in blue and gold, surmounted by an empty well ; keywords (قال المص, قوله, اقول) and section headings chrysographed, rubricated or in blue ; written area through p.20 surrounded by gold frame defined by black fillets, elsewhere surrounded by blue rule-border ; textual dividers in the form of gold, blue and red discs.", "Script: Naskh ; elegant, compact Ottoman hand [as well as possibly Iraqi or 'Syrian'?] in a medium line ; serifless with marked effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing (two and three dots) mainly in conjoined dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.", 'Layout: Written in 29 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 10 V(100), VII (114), 15 V(264) ; almost exclusively quinions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of black strokes in the outer margin of the left-hand leaf (beginning with the second) ; page between the two sections left blank (p.229) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: [al-niṣf al-awwal] "Scribal," rectangular, reads "قد اتفق الفراغ من تحرير هذه النسخة الشريفة في ليلة الخميس قبيل وقت العشاء من شهر ربيع الاخر من شهور سنة اربع وثمانين وتسعمائة وقد كان كتب ما بعد كتاب البيوع ونبذ من اوله في السنة الاولى ولكن تاخر الاتمام لكون الصعوبة في تحصيل النسخة لعزتها بين العلماء العظام وقلتها فيما بين العوام من الانام الحمد لله على التمام ونصلي على رسوله محمد سيد الانام وعلى اله واصحابه الكرام" ; [al-niṣf al-thānī] "Scribal," triangular, reads "اتفق الفراغ من كتبة هذه النسخة الشريفة على يد اضعف عباد الله الرحيم العبد الجريم مصطفى بن عبد الكريم بتاريخ سنة ثلث وثمانين وتسعمائة غفر الله لمن طالعه ودعا لمؤلفه وكاتبه تم"', 'Explicit: "اقول وقد صرح في اول الجنايات تؤثر في سقوط القصاص تم تم تم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله لمن لا غاية لعنايته الازلية ولا نهاية لهدايته العلية ... وبعد فان العبد الفقير الى عناية الله المستعان المدعو بعبد الرحمن يقول ايها الاخوان هذا نبذ من فوائد الاستاذ النافع والسعد البادع ... سعد بن عيسى بن امير خان افاض الله تعالى عليهم ينابيع الرحمة والغفران ... فوجدت من كتبه كتاب العناية للهداية في يد بعض الورثة ... ثم وجدت من كتبه كتاب الهداية في سلك ملك بعض الاعيان فسألت عنه ذلك الكتاب بطريق العارية فارسل الي بلا امتنان فلما يسر الله الفوز بهذين الكتابين الذين صرف الاستاذ اكثر عمره الى تحشيتهما ... شرعت في جمع ما كتبه على هوامش الهداية وشرح اكمل الدين واسرعت الى تكميله وتتميمه بالتدوين ... ثم اعلم انه اذا ذكر قال المص ... فالمراد منه صاحب الهداية واذا ذكر قوله بالاحمر فالمراد منه الشارح اكمل الدين واذا ذكر اقول فالمراد منه الاستاذ المرحوم سعد الملة والدين ..."', "Title from waqf statement on 'title page' now obscured by flyleaf (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the gloss by Saʻd Allāh ibn ʻĪsá ibn Amīr Khān, known as Saʻdī Chalabī or Saʻdī Afandī (Sadi Çelebi or Sadi Efendi, d.1538 or 9) upon al-ʻInāyah, the commentary by Akmal al-Dīn al-Babārtī (d.1384) on al-Hidāyah, the celebrated commentary by ʻAlī ibn Abī Bakr al-Marghīnānī (d. 593/1197) on his compendium of Ḥanafī law, Bidāyat al-mubtadiʼ fī furūʻ al-fiqh al-Ḥanafī. Arranged in two halves (النصف الاول والنصف الثانى) or volumes in one.'])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated and overlined in red; marginal commentary in Turkish in hand of copyist (same as that of Mich. Isl. Mss. 750,2-4).', 'Date based on that in colophons of Mich. Isl. Mss. 750,2-3.', 'Pp. [1-5]. Bound with: [2] Badr al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad Sibṭ al-Māridīnī, Kifāyat al-qanūʻ fī al-ʻamal bi-al-rubʻ al-maqṭūʻ, pp. [6-24]; [3] Badr al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad Sibṭ al-Māridīnī, Risālah fī al-ʻamal bi-al-rubʻ al-mujayyab, pp. [25-38]; [4] Fāʾidah fī maʻrifat waqt al-imsāk fī ḥiṣṣat al-fajr, pp. [39-44].', 'Assorted material on timekeeping and the Coptic calendar.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1027', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.310, copied by Qāsim Bīk [Beg] ibn ʻĀdil Bīk [Beg]. Date of transcription note specified though excerpt in a different hand on back flyleaf (p.311) is dated 122- [?] [1806-1814?, final numeral unclear] which may provide a rough terminus ante quem of 1814. Paper, etc. may suggest late 17th or 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Two inserts carrying glosses (paginated pp.7-8, 155-156) -- b. Slip with Qurʼānic excerpts, etc. (between pp.100-101).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 176', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in block-printed paper (in bands of overlapping red and blue triangles alternating with bands of yellow) with red leather over spine and edges / turn-ins (decorative paper faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap), possibly two-piece binding (seam partly visible at spine) ; lower board lining in untinted wove paper ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; overall in somewhat poor condition with upper cover entirely lost, staining, abrasion, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', "Support: non-European laid paper with roughly 6 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct, somewhat wavy) and no chain lines plainly visible, quite thin, transluscent and crisp (in latter quires near tissue weight) though sturdy, quite well-sized and burnished to glossy ; replacement leaf (carrying 'title page' and incipit page) in European laid paper with watermark of arms with three stars above three mounts with crown above.", 'Decoration: Keywords rubricated ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; large, bold Persianate hand, in a heavy line ; mainly serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing somewhat careless and mainly in conjoined dots (for two and three dots), bowl of final nūn especially large and prominant, alif lām of definite article often assimilated, partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board visible).', 'Collation: IV+2 (10), 5 IV(50), III (56), 11 IV(144), i ; almost exclusively quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of double stroke looking like elongated "۷" typically on the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and back flyleaf and skips ahead twenty pages following p.171 with p.192).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "وانتهى كتابة نسخة المولوي اخوند ملا يوسف في يد الغريق في بحر العصيان قاسم بيك ابن عادل بيك اللهم ثقل ميزانهما وميزان جميع الله محمد صلعم"', 'Explicit: "هذا اول ما صنفته على اخر ما صنفت العلامة الدواني "', 'Incipit: "كيف لا احمد وكيف احمد لمن لم يخزنا مما عصينا ولم يخزنا بما نسينا ... وبعد فيقول الاحوج من الاحوج الذي لا خيره برحي ... ابن محمد خان القراباغي محمد الشاهي ... يوسف ... لما كان علم الكلام علما باحثا ... وكان شرح العقائد العضدية للعلامة ... جلال الحق والملة والدين محمد ابن اسعد الصديق الدواني ... مشتملا على غرر الفوائد ..."', 'Title from inscription at close on p.310.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of the gloss by Yūsuf ibn Muḥammad Khān al-Qarabāghī (al-Qarahʹbāghī) upon the commentary of Jalāl al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Asʻad al-Dawwānī (d.1512 or 3) on the ʻAqāʼid of ʻAḍud al-Dīn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Aḥmad al-Ījī (d. 756/1355).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 468', 'Origin: Ends abruptly and lacks dated colophon ; paper and hand would suggest 17th century ; dated waqf statement provides a terminus ante quem of 1782-83.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 83" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in laid paper with a vegetal design stamped in high relief, edges and spine covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now missing) ; board linings in European laid paper ; sewn in black thread, four stations ; endbands entirely gone ; in poor condition with significant delamination and losses to both covers, especially at the corners ; lower cover almost entirely detached ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely 17th century Persian) laid paper with laid lines spaced roughly 8-9 laid lines per cm., some sagging and curving, and occasional single chain line visible ; varying in orientation ; crisp ; many undissolved fibers ; back flyleaf and pastedown in European laid paper with watermark (horn in shield, crown above, initials "A B[?]" below) ; some ink burn.', 'Decoration: Text partially rubricated with keywords, overlining, etc. ; multiple gaps (lacunae) appear where rubrics would have gone indicate rubrication was never completed ; numerous pages where some but not all of the rubrics have been supplied (filling the gaps).', 'Script: Naskh ; very nice, neat hand with vertical, sans serif alifs ; mostly pointed, frequently vowelled.', 'Layout: Written in 27-33 lines per page, highly inconsistent though number of lines tends to increase as one proceeds through the codex ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 23 V(230),i ; entirely quinions ; quires signed (numbered) with full word (e.g. الخامس) appearing in the top left corner of the recto of the first page of each quire, frequently lost partially or entirely to trimming and page wear (see first at fol.31a/p.61) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "ان الله يحكم ما يريد من تحليل وتحريم لو جعل ما يريد اعم من ذلك لكان ابلغ في وجوب قبول احكامه واذا صرح الكساف بعمومه ولما كان تحريم الصيد للمحرم ومما لا تظهر مصلحته عقبه به ...[؟] على انه ليس لاحد ان لا يقبل احكامه الا بعد معرفة ...[؟] بل ينبغي ان ينقاد لانه"', 'Incipit: "قوله الحمد لله الذي نزل الفرقان على عبده ليكون للعالمين نذيرا اقتبس اقتباسا لطيفا من قوله تعالى تبارك الذي نزل الفرقان على عبده ليكون للعالمين نذيرا ولا يحتاج فيه الى دفع ما يتجه على المقتبس منه"', 'Title from waqf statement on fol.1a (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of what is likely the gloss of ‘Isām al-Dīn Ibrāhīm ibn Muḥammad ibn ʻArab Shāh al-Isfarā’inī (al-Isfarāyinī) on the commentary of al-Bayḍawī, lacking any opening matter and proceeding from Sūrat al-Fātiḥah only to Sūrat al-Māʼidah (5). Description provided by Noah Gardiner.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 131', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; hand and paper suggests late 17th to mid 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Vast number of inserts tipped in (all paginated) carrying glosses and notes, including one decoratively trimmed (pp.49-50) and several tinted yellow (pp.253-254, etc.).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 77. Ibn Arab Shah\'s supercommentary on Kafiyah."', 'Binding: Pasteboards originally faced in black leather now covered by laid paper with dark red leather over spine, fore-edge flap, and edges/turn-ins (now paper faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; upper and lower covers bear evidence of blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (now covered by paper) ; sewn in cream (or light pink?) thread, two stations ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses to paper and leather of covers, delamination of boards, staining, etc. ; flap in fairly good condition.', 'Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark resembling initials or word (with "A A" or "A M"), quite difficult to make out (see pp.4, 6, 10, 122, 264, 290, 302, etc.), sturdy, cream in color, well-burnished ; inserts on different papers, one with watermark of lion rampant visible (see insert tipped in following p.46) ; some staining.', 'Decoration: Nearly monochrome (black ink) with very little use of red ; section headings set apart in larger, heavier script ; overlining in same black ink ; occasional abbreviation symbols rubricated ; rare overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; bold Turkish hand ; virtually serifless ; many closed counters ; somewhat freely ligatured ; kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred ; alif maqsūrá mainly mardūdah, final yāʼ occasionally muḥaqqaqah, but often mardūdah (in the word fī, etc.); lām alif ligature forms a closed loop ; slight effect of words descending to baseline becomes more pronounced toward middle of the codex ; hand changes slightly around p.196-197, similar in size and form but adopting a more rightward slant and more pronounced effect of words descending to basline, showing greater influence of nastaʻlīq ; section headings in larger heavier script.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V (10), I+1 (13), 9 V(103), IV+1 (112) ; chiefly quinions ; final leaf left blank ; slip pasted to obscure portion of text on p.26 ; lacks proper catchwords, but last word of final line on the verso of each leaf is usually repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and front flyleaf ; skips two pages between pp.5-6).', 'Explicit: "اي على عدد الفعل لا عدد نوعه وبهذا امتاز المثنى للنوع عن المثنى المفرد ... قوله"', 'Incipit: "يا هاديا لسالك [مسالك] محامدك ويا سامعا لجامع مسائل حامدك ... وبعد فيقول العبد المفتقر الى الله الغني عن العالمين ابراهيم بن محمد بن عرب شاه الاسفراني عصام الدين هذه حواش كالشمس لنجوم درر الزبر غواش ما فيه للفوائد الضيائية ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of ʻIṣām al-Dīn Ibrāhīm ibn Muḥammad ibn ʻArabshāh al-Isfarāyīnī's (or Isfarāʼīnī) gloss on Jāmī's al-Fawāʼid al-Ḍiyāʼīyah, itself a commentary on the Kāfiyah of Ibn al-Ḥājib, on Arabic syntax. Ends abruptly and appears incomplete."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 582', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.227, transcription completed in the first days of Ṣafar 1040 [September 1630].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (paginated pp.1-2) -- c. Insert with notes tipped in (paginated pp.47-48).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label, "IL 86" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in pink-tinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition, evoking cross) and tooled border (repeated floral motifs flanked by zig-zag pattern) ; design continues on flap ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in light blue and cream, significant damage at head and tail ; overall in quite poor condition with abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather (especially spine and flap), minor pest damage, almost fully detached at spine, etc. ; repairs to spine in brown leather.', 'Support: European laid paper ; mainly with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-27 mm. apart (horizontal), crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.18, 24, 62, etc.) and "B C" [?] under trefoil countermark (see p.20, etc.), sturdy and well-burnished ; at opening another type with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-30 mm. apart (horizontal), and hand / glove watermark (see p.6), fairly thick and sturdy, only lightly burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red and black.', 'Script: Maghribī ; fine hand in heavy line with sweeping descenders, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: II (4), 10 V(104), IV (112) ; chiefly quinions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of "٢" in outer margin of right-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (some inserts paginated).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "وكان الفراغ من نسخه يوم الاحد اوائل صفر المعظم الخير من عام اربعين والف وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم تسليما"', 'Explicit: "فيكون مستحبا ولما احتملت صلاته هذا الوجه توقف في ان يقول انه يكره انتهى بانتصار والله اعلم وهذا اخر ما يسر الله جمعه من الحواشي الموجودة جعل الله ذلك خالصا لوجهه الكريم ونفع به كما نفع باصله بجاه سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم تسليما ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم"', 'Incipit: "... يقول العبد الفقير الى الله تعالى يحيى بن محمد بن محمد الحطاب المالكي لطف الله به امين الحمد لله رب العالمين والعاقبة للمتقين ... وبعد فالموجب لسطور هذا الاوراق اني رأيت نسخة الوالد محمد بن محمد الحطاب من رسالة سيدنا الشيخ الامام ... جمال الدين ابو عبد الله محمد [كذا] بن ابي زيد القيرواني ... محتوية على حواش جميلة متضمنة لتقييدات ... فاردت في هذه الاوراق جمع شملها ونظم عقدها ... جعلت ذلك تذكرة لنفسي ..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf verso (p.4).', 'Ms. codex.', '3. p.227-p.228 : [assorted excerpts, partially blank].', '2. p.12- p.227 : Ḥāshiyat al-Ḥaṭṭāb ʻalá Risālat Ibn Abī Zayd / Yaḥyá ibn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Ḥaṭṭāb.', "1. p.3-p.11 : [contents listings, former owners' marks, various excerpts, etc. ; partially blank].", 'Fine copy a collection of glosses compiled by the author from the glosses appearing in a manuscript belonging to his father, Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Ḥaṭṭāb (d.1546?), of al-Risālah, the renowned Mālikī treatise by Abū Muḥammad ʻAbd Allāh ibn Abī Zayd al-Qayrawānī (d. 996). Tables of contents at opening (p.3 and p.5) and contents listing on p.9 indicate that this copy of the text was once part of a collection of works (majmūʻah).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 559', 'Origin: Details of transcription not specified, though detailed collation statement on fol.284a in name of Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥasan [al-Ḥusayn ?] al-Tūqātī dated 27 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 715 [ca. 23 March 1316] provides terminus ante quem of 1316.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From front flyleaf and spine label, "IL 105b" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black cloth with spine covered in black leather (quarter-bound); Western style binding; spine gold-stamped with title and author "الحواشي الخبازية عمر الخبازي" as well as decorative bands along ridges; not original to the codex, imprint/stain of the flap of a former binding is clearly seen on early flyleaf; in good condition.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly indistinct) and chain lines only rarely visible though grouped (group of three visible at least, see p.532); cloudy furnish, many inclusions, quite dense and sturdy, burnished; ink burn from acidic ink.', 'Script: Naskh; old, scarcely pointed Syrian or Egyptian hand; entirely sans-serif, lām alif al-warrāqīyah used only occasionally; excessively acidic ink has damaged and led to loss of text; collation statement in a rough taʻlīq, partially seriffed and highly ligatured, with words descending onto the baseline and the ends of the lines slightly curving upwards in characteristic fashion.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page.', 'Collation: iii, III+1 (7), III (13), I (15), 3 IV (39), 2 V (59), IV (67), V (77), 19 IV (229), V (239), 5 IV (279), III+1 (286), ii; chiefly quaternions; lacking catchwords; quire signatures (numbering) present for quires 2 through 37 (skipping 4 and 31) as the ordinal number of each quire written out on the outer corner of the first folio; the entire 31st quire appears to be missing and a statement to this fact is found on fol.239b; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals begins with ٢ on the folio following the incipit page, mistakenly skips a leaf at fol.269-270; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, referenced in cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "صغر الورثة واقوى الوصيين وصي الاب والجد واضعف الحالين حال كبر الورثة تم الكتاب بحمد لله ومنه"', 'Incipit: "كتاب الطهارات قال الله تعالى يا ايها الذين امنوا اذا قمتم الى الصلوة..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Commentary on al-Hidāyah, by ʻAlī ibn Abī Bakr Burhān al-Dīn al-Marghīnānī. Begins with Kitāb al-ṭahārāt. Additional excerpts at the beginning and end of text.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 39', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon. Paper may suggest 15th century.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 26. Glosses on al-Mawakif." ; possible former shelfmark "۲٥" on fol.1a (p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in brown leather ; upper and lower covers each bear a superbly executed gold-tooled mandorla accented by fine rope border extending to form pendants and filled with interlace (compare Weisweiler W 89-95), along with tooled rope border and gold-tooled cornerpieces ; design is continued on envelope flap ; sewn in cream thread, two stations, though sewing broken or completely lost in many quires ; many loose leaves ; endbands virtually gone, only traces remain ; in fair condition with abrasion, staining, lifting of leather at spine and fore-edge though cover is nearly entirely detached from textblock and ill-fitting (large).', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines arranged in groups of three (vertical) with 9-14 mm. between the chains and 31-42 mm. between the groups.', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with keywords, section headings, overlining, etc. in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Turkish (?) hand ; virtually serifless ; effect of slight tilt to the right and occasional descent of words to the baseline ; final words and letters of lines occasionally superscript ; mainly closed counters ; some sweeping descenders, more tapered ; some free assimilation of letters ; point of nūn assimilated with bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 29 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: V+1 (11), V (21), VI (33), 3 V(63), I (65), 6 V(125), I (127), 2 V(147) ; chiefly quinions ; mid-bifolium of second quire was mistakenly placed between first and second quire such that it was mistakenly paginated pp.23-26, now correctly placed between pp.34-35 ; catchwords present though occasionally lacking, consistently appear on final leaf of each quire ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "هذا انما يكون مجازا مفارقا للكذب ولو وجد بجد في نية ... ارادة ... ولم يوخذ ... لا نهي [؟] تم بعون الله عز وجل"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي تولهت الافهام في كبرياء ذاته وتحيرت الاوهام في عظمة صفاته ... وبعد فاعلموا ان معاشر طلاب اليقين سلام عليكم لا نبتغى الجاهلين ان اصحاب العقل متطابقون"', 'Title from inscription on fol.1a (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the gloss of Ḥasan Chalabī on al-Jurjānī's commentary on the work of al-Ījī, al-Mawāqif fī ʻilm al-kalām, on scholastic theology."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 151', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.181b (p.362), completed in 978 [1570 or 1571]. Name of copyist is not supplied.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No.37. Glosses on Talkhis al-Miftah."', 'Binding: Pasteboards coverd in brown leather (pebble grained appearance of shagreen) over marbled paper ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures and interior of foreedge and envelope flaps in red leather ; upper and lower cover bear a simple rule-border consisting of a series of gold-painted fillets, better preserved on the flap ; in fair condition with abrasion, some tears, repairs to spine, and loose sewing.', 'Support: non-European (?) laid paper with laid lines barely visible, running horizontally and spaced roughly 9 laid lines per cm., chain lines barely visible, running vertically and irregularly spaced though occasionally 25 mm. apart, many inclusions and undissolved fibers, rather thin, and burnished ; flyleaves are in a different European laid paper with partial watermarks "Tosco..." [?] and six pointed star.', 'Decoration: Simple frame consisting of a gold band framed by black fillets ; text rubricated with keywords such as "قوله", chapter headings and overlinings in red.', 'Script: Naskh / Nastaʻlīq ; entire ms. in same Persian (?) hand ; sans serif and characteristic sloping of words to baseline ; fully pointed to convention.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, IV (8), II (12), 5 IV (52), II+1 (57), III (63), V (73), IV (81), III+1 (88), 10 IV (168), IV+1 (177), II (181), i ; mainly quaternians ; middle of the quire marks resembling circles and occasionally the letter "ه" ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "وتمت بعون الله وحسن توفيقه شهور سنة ثماني سبعين وتسعماية ... صلى الله عليه وآله وعترته الطاهرين م م م"', 'Explicit: "قوله ومثل الخيفاء ويقال فرس أخيف اذا كان احدى عينيه زرقاء والاخرى سوداء ومثل الرقطا[ء] قوله الرقط سواد شوبه نقط بياض يقال دجاجة رقطاء"', 'Incipit: "وبعد فهذه حواش على الشرح المشهور لتلخيص المفتاح كنت قد قيدتها عليه مجملة حال ما قراه عليه بعض احبتي فسألوني بعد امد ان افصلها لهم وأنقدها ففعلت ذلك مستعينا بالله..."', 'Title from opening on fol.1b (p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', "al-Jurjānī's glosses on the longer commentary of al-Taftāzānī (d.1389?) upon Talkhīṣ al-Miftāḥ by Jalāl al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Qazwīnī (d. 739/1338), an abridgment of the third part of Miftāḥ al-ʻulūm by al-Sakkākī (d. 626/1229), on ʻIlm al-maʻānī wa-al-bayān. Description provided by Maxim Romanov."])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Three crescents. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Text rubricated and overlined in red; marginal corrections and notes in hand of copyist; pp. [39-52] are on different paper in a different hand.', 'For another copy of this text, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 800,2.', '"An extract from the Risāla fī al-ʻamal bi-rubʻ al-dāʼira al-mauḍūʻ fīhi al-muqanṭarāt of Jamāl al-Dīn ʻAbd Allāh ibn Khalīl, al-Māridīnī." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 553', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.263, copied by ʻAbd al-Qādir al-Musallamī ; date of transcription not specified though paper, etc. may suggest 14th or even late 13th century (see Humbert, pp.33-35).', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 97" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in shell marbled paper (mainly in blue and brown) with dark green cloth over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in beige wove paper ; resewn mainly in yellow thread, six stations, then black thread in final three quires ; stuck-on endbands ; overall in somewhat poor condition but with abrasion, lifting and losses of paper, delamination of boards at corners, staining, some spine slant (slightly cocked), etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with roughly 9-10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines spaced in threes with 13-17 mm. between chains and 35-38 mm. between groups (vertical) ; quite thick, sturdy and soft with laid and chain lines rather indistinct ; striated pattern and possible zigzag appears in many leaves (see p.30, 39, etc.) ; staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', "Script: Naskh ; clear, quite compact 'Syrian' or Egyptian [?] hand ; virtually serifless with curvinlinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots, many closed counters, and slight effect of tilt to the left.", 'Layout: Written in 33 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 1 (1), V+1 (12), 2 V(32), IV+1 (41), 9 V(131) ; chiefly quinions ; acephalous, with further leaves missing between first two leaves (as extant) for roughly 40 leaves missing altogether ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (opening leaf numbered ٣٢, following ٤۸) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and front flyleaf , mistakenly repeats p.39 and p.42).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "على يد الفقير الى الله تعالى عبد القادر المسلمي غفر الله له ولوالديه"', 'Explicit: "وهذا اساس قياس جليل يفتح بمعرفته ابواب النجاة ويرقي بمراقيه مراقي الدرجات والله تبارك وتعالى اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب ونسأله اللطف يوم الحساب انقضى تحرير الحاوي القدسي ونجز وابى محرره التطويل فاوجز وقد حوي بحمد الله ومنه مسائل مجموعات كثيرة في الاصوليين كاعتقاد الطحاوي وتمهيد النسفي ... وفي الفروع كجامع الصغير ومختصر القذوري ... لا ينقص مجموعه عن اربعين الف مسئلة والحمد لله وحده"', 'Incipit: "في بيت مال المسلمين ..."', 'Title from closing matter on p.263.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Acephalous early copy of the work of Ḥanafī law most commonly attributed to Jamāl al-Dīn Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Nūḥ al-Qābisī al-Ghaznawī. See Isl. Ms. 92 for another ms. copy.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 122', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.471a/p.942, composition finished Rajab 773 [January 1372]. As also appears in colohon on fol.471a/p.941, transcription of this copy executed by the owner, Muḥammad Sulaymān ("wa-kāna al-farāgh min kitābat hādhihi al-nuskhah...wa-dhālik ʻalá yad mālikihā") with transcription finished Jumādá II 1110 [Dec 1698 - Jan 1699]. A note following the colophon provides details on the exemplar and its exemplar.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 53. Hayat al-hayawan."', "Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather; Type II binding (with flap); board linings / doublures in decorative paper (block-stamped with vegetal design of large blossoms, leaves and berries in blue and red), hinges in red leather ; upper and lower covers carry stamped central mandorla, pendants, cornerpieces, and triangular pieces, all carrying floral compositions, as well as wide border in a series of zig-zag stamps, all over once 'gold'-painted, now white onlays; cover design continues on flap; now sewn in white thread, two stations, now very tightly bound; worked chevron endbands in red and blue over white, excellent conditions; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion, lifting of leather, etc.", 'Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 22-25 mm. apart (vertical), and watermarks of two circles surmounted by cross itself surmounted by crown (see p.6, 152, 196, etc.) and two circles surmounted by cross flanked by lions (see p.32, 52, 342, etc.), quite sturdy though fairly thin and crisp, extremely well-burnished to glossy; flyleaves of heavier European (specifically Venetian made by the Galvani firm) laid paper with crescent in shield (smiling human profile) watermark and "V G" countermark (compare Walz, The Paper trade of Egypt and the Sudan, 88-9).', 'Decoration: Fine illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) on fol.1b, semi-circular piece mainly gold with blue and red accents in vegetal pattern, evokes the miḥrāb; cartouche within lower panel of headpiece blank, flanked by floral designs; rule-borders in red, blue and gold on incipit page and facing page, red rule-borders thereafter throughout; textual dividers in the form of three dots in red and black; text rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Egyptian hand in a medium line; mainly serifless though with occasional right-sloping serifs on free-standing alif, compactly filling the line, adhering to baseline, curvilinear descenders, foot / tail of lām long and flat, pointing mainly in distinct dots, though curves and strokes occasionally used for two and three dots, alif maqṣūrah often pointed as yāʼ, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf).', 'Layout: Written in 33 lines per page; frame-ruled (impression of misṭarah evident).', 'Collation: Appears to be a very regular sequence of quinions followed by a binion, interrupted only by a ternion followed by a binion at fol.41 and a binion at fol.149; middle of the quire marks in the form of dashes in upper corner of the right-hand leaf and lower corner of the left-hand leaf (see fol. 4b-5a, fol.24b-25a, etc.); catchwords present; pagination in pencil, Western numerals.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular and triangular, reads "وكفي قال مؤلفه رحمه الله تعلى وكان الفراغ من مسودته في شهر رجب الفرد سنة ثلاث وسبعين وسبعمائة وكان الفراغ من كتابة هذه النسخة في يوم الاثنين المبارك قبل الظهر في شهر جمادى الثاني من شهور سنة عشر ومائة والف من الهحرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلاة واتم التسليم وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل وذلك على يد مالكها الفقير المعترف بالذنب والتقصير السيد محمد سليمان ش"', 'Explicit: "هذا ما انتهى الينا الغرض مما يحصل به في هذا الشان الاكتفا وختم بملك النحل الذي استخرج الله منه الشجاعة ... الذي منه الشجاعة تقتفي وصلى الله وسلم على سيد المرسلين محمد المصطفى ورضي الله عن اله و [...؟] وصحبه اهل الفضل والوفا وحسبنا [؟] الله"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي شرف نوع الانسان بالاصغرين القلب واللسان وفضله على سائر الحيوان بنعمتي النطق والبيان ... وبعد فهذا كتاب لم يسالني احد تصنيفه ولا كلفت القريحة تاليفه... واستخرت الله تعالى وهو الكريم المنان في وضع كتاب في هذا الشان وسميته حياة الحيوان ... ورتبته على حروف المعجم ... باب الهمزة"', "Title from 'title page' fol.1a.", 'Ms. codex.', 'Zoological dictionary, with descriptions of animals arranged in alphabetical order. Text followed by an excerpt from a work of ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad al-Ujhūrī (1559 or 60-1656) and excerpt from "Manāfiʻ al-aʻshāb."'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Three crescents; Andrea Galvani of Pordenone. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum ,1950), pp. 24 and 36.', 'Tables rubricated; some foliation in pencil.', 'Probable 18th-cent. date based on start date of tables.', 'Entirely tables: astronomical tables, star catalogs, and geographical tables based on those of Ulugh Beg. Calendrical table for Islamic years 1110 [1698] to 2100 [2658].'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 264', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.306, copied by Pīr Jalīl Burdahʹlīq with transcription completed 1 Jumādá II 880 [ca. 2 October 1475]. As appears in authorial colophon on p.290 (contribution to the cataloguing from Ali Safari Agh Ghaleh), composition completed 9 Shaʻbān 695 [ca. 12 June 1296].', 'Former shelfmark: "129 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on upper pastedown.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in tan leather with dull red leather over spine and edges / turn-ins (possible repair / restoration treatment) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in green wove paper ; upper and lower covers carry central scalloped mandorla with traces of filigreé (now lost) on recessed paper onlays ; sewn in light blue thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in light blue and golden yellow, good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with losses of onlays, some abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and single chains irregularly visible (horizontal), sturdy and well-burnished ; many leaves now guarded ; flyleaves in European wove paper.', 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ ) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with cartouche ending in scalloped domes carrying inscription (" الله ولا سواك [?]" ) in foliated Kufic surrounded by swirling arabesque (all in gold) and accented by red and blue dots flanked by delicated floral vegetal composition on lapis lazuli and bordered in gold, white and turquoise bands, surmounted by a row of elegant arabesque in white, gold, red, turquoise, etc. on a lapis lazuli ground, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area throughout surrounded by narrow gold frame defined by black fillets and outermost blue rule ; some keywords chrysographed, others rubricated or in blue ink ; occasional textual dividers in the form of gold discs.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless, with slight effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes, pointing somewhat inconsistent and occasionally unclear ; partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV-1 (7), IV (15), IV+1 (24), 5 IV(64), IV+3 (75), 4 IV(107), IV+1 (116), IV (124), 2 III (136), IV (144), IV+1 (153), i ; quaternions (many anomalous) and two ternions ; catchwords present (occasionally cut off) ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Dedication: Apparently compiled for amīr Nawrūz Beg (d.1297) [?], see dedication on p.3 "از لطايف صنع و آثار فضل خود خداوند و مخدوم جهانان امير بزرگ عالم عادل خسرو افاق لشكركس و سپهدار خراسان و عراق نوشيروان عهد صاحب السيف و القلم مدبر امور العالم ناصر عباد الله حافظ بلاد الله المنظور من السماء المظفر على الاعداء المخصوص بعنايت رب العالمين خسرو زمين و زمان صاحب قرآن امير المؤمنين برهان رسول رب العالمين غياث الاسلام و المسلمين نوروز بيگ خلد الله ملكه ..."', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تم الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب فى غره جمادى الثانى سنه ۸۸۰ تم لفقير الحقير پر جليل برده ليق"', 'Explicit: "اين عاريت است والله اعلم بالصواب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين و الصلوة على رسوله آدم ومحمد وما بينهما من الانبياء والمرسلين وعلى آله البرره الطيبين وصحبه السفره الطاهرين وعلى محبهم ومحب محبيهم الى يوم الدين چون ايزد سبحانه و تعالى بعد از تاريخ هجرت مصطفى صلى الله عليه و سلم بششصد و نودوبنج سال خواست كه دين محمدى را كه بهترين اديانست ... و اين كتاب را حيرة الفقها خجله الفصلا [الفضلاء] نام نهادم انشا الله العزيز ...."', 'Title from opening matter on (p.7).', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of a collection of legal decisions compiled by ʻAlā Muftī Bukhārī (Bukhārāyī). Further details on the composition, works consulted, etc. appear on pp.8-10. For other manuscript copies see Dānish'pazhūh, Nuskhahʹhā-yi khaṭṭī dar kitābkhānahʹhā-yi Ittiḥād-i Jamāhīr-i Shūravī va Urūpā va Āmrīkā: guzārish va fihrist (Nuskhahʹhā-yi khaṭṭī daftar dahum), no.173, p.105."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 859', "Origin: According to 'colophon' on p.344 (in a different hand that the bulk of the text), copied by Muḥammad Ḥusnī (Mehmet Husni). Date of transcription not specified ; paper, etc. would suggest late 18th century and waqf statement on 'title page' (p.1) provides a terminus ante quem of 1793.", 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with notes in hand of Eleazar Birnbaum, "Author: VĀHIB-i UMMĪ, also called VĀHIBĪ | Title: [? DĪVĀN] | Religious poetical works in Ottoman Turkish. The author is not well-known. His name is wrongly written VAHHĀB-i UMMĪ in a later hand on fly leaf. A waqf note dated 1107 AH (1696 AD) on fly leaf. The writing seems 16th-17th cent. E Birnbaum June 1964" -- b. Slip with description (in hand of E. Husselman ?) "Wahhab i Ummi. Dīvān. Turkish MS. BMC. Turk. MSS. has Dīvān of Vāhibī in a MS. of mixed contents, & it may be the same person ; very uncertain. | n. f. anywhere"', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 8', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; upper board lining now in recycled paper (printed "waste") ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, now difficult to make out, with onlays gone to green where still present), pendant and cornerpieces, as well as tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; overall in poor condition with losses of onlays, abrasion, some staining, lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; repair to spine in black cloth / textile (rebacked) ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with roughly 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 20-21 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of lion rampant guardant (see p.12, 14, 24, etc.) and "G V" ["V G"] countermark (see p.15, 26, 32, etc., likely Valentino Galvani, see pp.88-89 in Walz, "The paper trade of Egypt and the Sudan" and compare Eineder nos.986, 987, etc. though here with different lion motif), thin though sturdy, cream in color, well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Written area (and divisions within) surrounded by double rule-border in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Turkish hand in a bold line ; partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on occasional lām, even free-standing alif, effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, open and closed counters, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, written area mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 16 V(160), VI (172), i (pasted to lower board lining) ; quinions followed by a senion ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, every other page, with pagination of remaining pages supplied much later during digitization (due to misplacement of bifolia when codex was paginated, skips from p.62 to 83 with leaves paginated 63-82 are now properly found between p.342-343).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "كتبه الفقير الحقير محمد حسنى غفر الله له ولوالديه ولجميع المؤمنين والمؤمنات برحمتك يا ارحم الراحمين"', 'Explicit: "واهب امى يو قلغنك وارلغندن سويلر سكا توحيد بكا شاهديز كشف اللهدن كلورز بيز"', 'Incipit: "كوزك اوج جانله دكله منزه پادشاهم بن ..."', "Title from inscription accompanying waqf statement on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the dīvān of Vahib-i Ümmî (Vahibi, Vahhab-i Ümmî) Abdülvahab (d.1595).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 855', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.624, bulk of manuscript (p.51 to close) copied by Ḥāfiẓ Abū al-Fatḥ ibn Qāḍī Ḍiyāʼ al-Dīn Muḥammad Rāzī (Hafız Ebülfatih b. Kadı Ziyaettin Mehmet Razi) with transcription completed 24 Shaʻbān 1000 [ca. 5 June 1592]. Replacement section (first three gatherings, through p.50) likely dates to early 19th century (ca. 1807-1830) as suggested by paper, hand, and decoration.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Pink card with typed description "[Muḥammad ibn Suleimān, Fuẓulī, d. c. 1562] | Ḥadīqat al-suʻadāʼ. | Turkish. Ms." -- b. Bits of unused "gold" leaf found between pp.384-385 and 412-413 -- c. Pen shaving found between pp.508-509.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 4', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in a cut velvet printed with a colorful floral pattern incorporating boteh (بوته) and other designs (in shades of blue, red, yellow, and green on grounds of red, white and dark blue) with spine, fore edge flap and edges / turn-ins in dark brown leather (textile faced, leather edged framed binding / frame covers) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in pink-tinted, gold-flecked laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry tooled and gold-painted border ; fore edge flap carries gold-painted designs ; envelope flap also covered in cut velvet ; sewn in dark pink to mauve thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and white, fairly good condition ; overall in fair condition though upper cover fully detached, some staining and losses to textile, minor abrasion and staining of leather, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with roughly 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, quite faint and indistinct) and occasional chain lines faintly visible, cloudy formation, inclusions and fibers visible, thin though quite sturdy, lightly burnished, dark cream to beige in color, some staining and tide lines ; replacement leaves of opening section (through p.50) in European laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 29-30 mm. apart (horizontal) and watermarks of lion passant guardant (see p.6,7, 22, 32, 46, 50, etc.) and "AFG" (see p.4,9, 26, etc. i.e. Antonio et Fratelli Galvani, see pp.88-89 in Walz, "The paper trade of Egypt and the Sudan" and compare Eineder nos. 997, 1003, etc. dated 1807), medium cream with a yellow hue, sturdy, and well-burnished ; flyleaves also in European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of scalloped dome filled with floral vegetal composition in gold, set in a well of pink, blue and gold bands and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in red and blue ; written area throughout surrounded by a gold frame defined by black fillets with outermost blue rule ; textual dividers in the form of gold discs on incipit page ; keywords and headings rubricated (red inks of each section distinct).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; two elegant hands ; both serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, mainly closed counters, pointing in distinct or conjoined dots ; hand supplying replacement section at opening (pp.1-50) slightly finer, larger and more compact along the line with large, open and sometimes sweeping descenders, and exaggerated elongation of some horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 14 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV-1+1 (8), IV+1 (17), IV (25), IV-1 (32), 4 IV(64), III (70), 23 IV(254), III+1 (261), 6 IV(309), I+1 (312), i ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present, plainly visible in opening section (through p.50) but mainly cutoff in bulk of codex (p.50 to close) ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes back flyleaf).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمت الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب تحريرا فى چهار شنبه اربع وعشرين من شهر شعبان المعظم سنه الف كاتبه الفقير الحقير كثير التقصير حافظ ابو الفتح بن قاضى ضياء الدين محمد رازى غفر ذنوبهما"', 'Explicit: "كل اى حال تكلمدن خبردار ترحم قيل تعرض اتمه زنهار"', 'Incipit: "يا رب ره عشقنده بنى شيدا قيل احكام عبادتى بكا اجرا قيل ..."', 'Title from inscription above headpiece at opening on p.2.', 'Ms. composite codex.', 'Elegant composite copy of Fuzulî’s rendering of the suffering of the prophets, particularly Imām Ḥusayn in the tragedy at Karbalāʼ, drawn from Ḥusayn Vāʻiẓ Kāshifī’s Rawz̤at al-shuhadāʼ, a Persian martyrology of ʻAlī and his family.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 321', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.373, copied by Muḥammad al-Sāvajī with transcription completed 1280 [1863 or 4].', 'Former shelfmark: "214 T. D. M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf ; "25 / 13" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in gray leather (pebbled quality of shagreen) ; Type III binding (without flap), two-piece binding (overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; doublures in red leather with gold-painted rule-borders ; upper and lower covers carry traces of gold-painted (now gone to green) rectangular panel and border ; sewn in lime green and red thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, etc. ; upper cover fully detached with spine flange intact ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct) and chains occasionally visible, quite sturdy though transluscent, extremely well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Exquisitely rich illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying the title in red ( "هذا كتاب خواجه حافظ شيرازى عليه الرحمه" ) flanked by gold accents with swirling arabesque red-orange, pink, green, etc. on fields of black and blue (lapis lazuli), surmounted by tall scalloped w-shaped piece with inset domes all filled with elaborate swirling arabesques with floral accents in gold, white, turquoise, red, pink, yellow, etc. on fields of blue (lapis lazuli) and gold, itself set into an elaborate well of bands in turquoise, red, white, and red-orange with arabesque and chī cloud design on black ground ; entire piece bordered by gold interlace or ropework border ; incipit and facing page carry richly executed illuminated marginal decoration in the form of swirling arabesques over various shapes in gold, red, black, turquoise, lapis lazuli, pink, lavender, green, white, etc. ; written area throughout surrounded by a heavy frame of gold, red, blue and turquoise bands with outermost blue rule ; area of margins outlined in red and gold ; text of incipit and facing page set off with gold cloud-bands ; occasional floral vegetal accents gold etc. appear occasionally between sections of text.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 14 lines per page ; written area divided to two columns to set-off poetry ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, V (10), 4 IV(42), V (52), 2 II(60), 13 IV(164), II (168), 2 IV(184), II (188) ; chiefly quaternions and binions ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, in Arabic, reads "مشقه العبد المذنب الفقير الحقير العاصى محمد الساوجى سنه ۱۲۸۰"', 'Explicit: "خاموش نشین که وقت خاموشی تست دم در کش و صراحی می و پر می کن"', 'Incipit: "الا یا ایها الساقی ادر کاسا و ناولها که عشق آسان نمود اول ولی افتاد مشکلها ..."', 'Title from illuminated headpiece at opening on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Richly elegant copy of the Dīvān of the masterful poet Ḥāfiẓ (Khvājah Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad Shīrāzī, d.1390?).'])

en: (count: ['Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, hand, etc. would suggest 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "42" in pencil on front flyleaf.', 'Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1057', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in light brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap), two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible on spine) ; present pastedowns and flyleaves (as well as lining of envelope flap) in marbled paper (blue, lavender, yellow and pink) ; upper and lower cover carry gold-stamped mandorla (gold applied to orange onlays, scalloped and filled with floral composition), as well as gold-painted border of rules, rosettes and accent strokes (frame lightly stamped with geometric design) ; design continues on flap ; sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in purple and white, primaries / tie downs also in white, quite good condition ; overall in good condition with minor abrasion, losses of gold, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persianate) laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical, some curving and sagging) and faint traces of chain lines only occasionally visible ; somewhat cloudy formation with inclusions and clumps of fiber visible ; well-burnished to glossy and likely surface sized, thin and crisp though sturdy, medium beige in color ; slip of lavender wove paper interleaved between fol.1-2, presumably to protect illuminated headpiece.', 'Decoration: Added illuminated titlepiece in gold and blue on fol.1a ; elegant and finely executed illuminated headpiece at opening on fol.1b consisting of w-shaped piece filled with swirling vegetal designs in gold outlined in orange on a blue ground set off by delicate floral accents in blue, white, pink, lavender, red and orange, all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and set in a well of gold and black interlace flanked by orange and white bands with contrasting red and blue crosses ; written area gold-flecked and surrounded by frame consisting of a gold band outlined in black fillets ; keywords and headings rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; chiefly an elegant Persianate hand in a thin line ; small, characteristically serifless with gentle effect of words descending to baseline ; elongation and slight contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes ; elegant shaqq / sar-kash (gently curving upward) on even final kāf ; pointing in distinct dots, though somewhat casual with occasional dots omitted ; point of final and free-standing nūn set down at center of somewhat narrow, angled bowl ; ʻalāmat ihmāl of three dots regularly appears under sīn.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 19 lines per page (single column) ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 11 IV(88), 3 III(106), 3 IV(130), III (136), 3 IV(160), III (166), 4 IV(198), III (204), 2 IV(220), III+1 (227), III (233), IV (241), I (243), 2 III(255), III+1 (262), 6 III(298), IV (306), 3 III(324), I (326), ii ; chiefly quaternions and ternions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Dedication: As appears in opening matter on fol.3b, composed for Sulṭān Saʻīd Bahādur Khān (سلطان سعيد بهادر خان).', 'Incipit: "فهرست قسم علمى از كتاب تحفه خانى مصنف حضرت ايشان سلمه الله و ابقاه [ابغاه] برءوس [رؤوس] العالمين الى يوم الدين باب اول در بيان قسم علمى كتاب و اين باب مشتمل بر نود و سه مقاله است ... الحمد لله الذى خلق الانسان فى احسن تقويم و هو يحيى العظام و هى رميم و الصلوة والسلام على حبيبه ونبيه شفى آلام الضلاله و اسقام الجهالة و على اله و اصحابه هم الهادين الى طريق الحق و سبيل الداله اما بعد عرض مدارد راقم اين سواد حقير قليل البضاعه محمود بن محمد عبد الله بن محمود نور الله انار الله مضاجعه كه جون در اوان شباب بواسطه كثرت طريان بعضى امراض مراين ضعيف را ..."', 'Title from illuminated titlepiece (chrysographed inscription set off by blue and gold cloudbands) on fol.1a (‘title page’).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of a Persian medical treatise by Maḥmūd ibn ʻAbd Allāh ibn ʻUbayd Allāh ibn Maḥmūd Nūr Allāh (fl. 15th century), followed by an appendix (ẕayl, cf. fol.283 to close). Compare Kitābkhānah-i Millī no.2876, Fihrist-i nusakh-i khaṭṭī-i Kitābkhānah-i Millī (Iran), v.6, pp.553-4.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 384', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, etc. suggest 18th century. Statement in red ink accompanied by dated seal impression on 'title page' (p.3) provides a terminus ante quem of 1846 (i.e. 12 Jumādá II 1262 = ca. 8 May 1846).", 'Former shelfmark: "584 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap), likely two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges barely visible at spine) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in an elegant marbled paper (mainly in red and dark blue or green) ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. NSd 7) and pendants, as well as a tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps evoking guilloché roll in gold ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in deep pink and pale yellow (or cream), good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with flap fully detached, some staining, minor abrasion, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) and European laid paper of several types ; first half of codex mainly in non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (mainly vertical, fairly distinct) and occasional chain lines visible, quite thin and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished, dark cream in color ; second half of the codex in several European laid papers, mainly with raisin watermarks including paper with 11-12 laid lines per cm. (mainly horizontal), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (mainly vertical) and watermarks of grapes under name and crown (see p.546, 552, etc.) and names (see p.542, 550, etc.) and paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of grapes under crown (see p.714, etc.) ; flyleaves in European laid paper (watermark of lion guardant visible in front flyleaf, p.2) ; significant breakthrough at frames (border at inner margin toward gutter in practically every leaf in the first four gatherings) ; leaf carrying p.471-472 delaminating.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.4, consisting of scalloped w-shaped piece with central gold cartouche (carrying the title in white "هذا شرح وصاف") surrounded by swirling floral vegetal composition in gold, pink, light blue, white, orange, red, etc. on a pale gold ground, surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in dark blue with gold accents, entire piece set in a well consisting of bands of red with white accents, white with dark blue accents, and heavy gold interlace with red and white accents ; other similar illuminated headpieces at the openings of other sections on p.262 and 444 ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by heavy "gold" frame defined by black fillets, elsewhere written area surrounded by narrower gold frame black fillets ; keywords rubricated ; passages being commented upon (matn of Tārīkh-i Vaṣṣāf) overlined in red ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; compact, elegant hand ; serifless, with slight effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, elongated horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 34 V(340), IV (348), VI (360), IV+1 (369), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; page between first and second volume left blank (p.261) ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals in black ink, recto of opening leaf of each from the second ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inner front flyleaf and skips two pages each between pp.83-84, 103-104, 353-354).', 'Explicit: "العباد شايان اولدوغى كبى ومثل هذا التسهيل قد سهل الله سبحانه وتعالى علينا ما رمناه من المقاصد الغالية والحمد كل الحمد لربنا رب المبدعات من العشرة العالية ... ونستغفره ونتوب اليه ونسأله العفو والعاقبة انه هو البر الرحيم تم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي رفع سبع طباق الخضراء بغير عمد ترونها واوحى بمقتضى حكمته في كل سماء امرها ... وبعد دل ارباب ذوى اللب والالباب ... كه بوندن اقدم شهرت يافتۀ اشتهار آفتاب عالمتاب اولان تاريخ وصاف عبارات مشكله وفقرات معضله ولغات عربيۀ مختلفه يعنى عربيه وفارسيه وچاغتالى ومغلى وخوارزمى ومصطلحات علوم صرف ونحو وعروض ومسيقى وايقاع وهندسه وحساب ومنطق وحكمت وكلام وساير مصطلح غريب اوزرينه ..."', 'Title from illuminated headpiece at opening (p.4).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the commentary by Bagdatlı Nazmizade Hüseyin Murtaza Efendi (d.1721 or 2?) on Vaṣṣāf’s Tajziyat al-amṣār wa-tazjiyat al-aʻṣār or Tārīkh-i Vaṣṣāf, a history of the Īlkhāns intended as a continuation of ʻAlāʼ al-Dīn ʻAṭā Malik Juvaynī’s (d.1283) Tārīkh-i Jahāngushā (Jahān-gushāy) and renowned for its form and style. Several volumes in one. Contributions to the cataloguing from Eren Miyasoğlu and Hossein Mottaghi.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1025', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.263, copied by Mullā Ḥusayn ibn Mullā ʻAlī al-ʻUshārī al-Baghdādī al-Shāfiʻī al-Ashaʻrī (d.1785?) with transcription completed in the latter part of Rabīʻ II 1171 [January 1758].', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 174', 'Binding: Pasteboards (thin) covered in dark brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; lower board lining in yellow tinted paper ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and pink, good condition ; overall in poor condition with upper cover entirely lost, much abrasion and losses of leather and board from lower cover, etc. ; spine repair (rebacked) in brown leather.', 'Support: European laid paper of a few types ; one type with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-27 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of double-headed eagle with heart at chest (see p.16, 18, 72, 106, 242, etc.) ; another type with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-24 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of grapes (raisin) with cartouche and crown above (see p.52-53, 190, etc.) ; final quire in a type with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark (92 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.248) ; a couple of name watermarks appear also, difficult to read, one possibly with "DAUPHINE" (see p.12, 20, 92-93, etc.) ; all sturdy and well-burnished ; flyleaves also in a three crescents watermarked paper (roughly 82 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see back flyleaf).', 'Decoration: Keywords and abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke overlining some keywords) rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant, compact Iraqi hand ; partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping tear-drop head-serif on occasional free-standing alif, lām, ṭāʼ, etc., effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, many open counters, words spaced very closely with many even touching by means of rising tail on a final descender, etc., pointing (two and three dots) in strokes or conjoined dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 12 V(120), V+1 (131),i ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "قد فرغت من كتابة هذه الحاشية المباركة الميمونة ظهر يوم الاثنين من اواخر ربيع الثاني سنة ١١٧١ وانا العبد الفقير الى الله تعالى ملا حسين بن ملا علي العشاري قبيلة البغدادي وطنا الشافعي مذهبا الاشعري عقيدة رحمه الله تعالى امين"', 'Explicit: "وانما ثبتت بالقياس على الال و في هذا القدر كفاية لمن تأمله بالدراية ... والحمد لله الذي هدانا لهذا وما كنا لنهتدي لو لا ان هدينا الله وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى ال سيدنا محمد ... ورضا نفسك امين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله المنعم بالهام الحمد لعبيده حمدا موافيا لنعمه ومدافعا لنقمه ... وبعد فيقول العبد الفقير الى مولاه الغني به عما سواه ... ابو بكر بن اسمعيل الشنواني ... هذه حواست [حواش] وضعتها على موصل الطلاب الى قواعد الاعراب للعلامة الشيخ خالد الازهري الشهير بالوقاد ... سميته هداية ذوي الالباب الى موصل الطلاب الى قواعد الاعراب ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.4.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the gloss by Abū Bakr ibn Ismāʻīl al-Shanawānī (d.1610 or 11) on the commentary by Zayn al-Dīn Khālid ibn ʻAbd Allāh al-Waqqād al-Azharī (d.1499) on Ibn Hishām's (d.1360) popular grammatical textbook, Qawāʻid al-iʻrāb."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 610', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.119a-119b (p.237-238) copied by Khiḍr ibn Yūsuf al-Nābulusī al-ʻAqrabānī for his brother al-Ḥājj Muḥammad al-Khayyāṭ. Transcription finished ("wāfaqa al-farāgh min naskh hādhā al-ḥikam...istiktāban...") Sunday the last day of Rajab 1208 [ca. 3 March 1794].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From spine label and inscription on interior of upper cover, "IL 105c" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown and cream mottled paper with red leather over spine, fore edge flap and edges / turn-ins (leather edged / leather framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; interior of envelope flap in same brown and cream decorative paper ; interior of fore edge flap in dark brown cloth ; pastedowns and flyleaves in laid European paper with partial watermark ("FF . PA") ; in good condition.', 'Support: European laid paper with laid lines running horizontally spaced roughly 8 laid lines per cm., chain lines running vertically spaced roughly 25-30 mm. apart ; countermark "C S" visible in fol.5, fol.102, etc. ; flyleaves and pastedowns in a different European laid paper (chain lines running vertically and spaced roughly 30 mm. apart) with partial watermark or counter mark "FF . PA" ; final singulon appears to be of still a different European laid paper with chain lines running vertically and spaced 25-28 mm. and laid lines spaced roughly 7-8 laid lines per cm., cresent watermark in fol.199.', 'Decoration: Textual dividers in the form of red discs ; text rubricated with section headings in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; Syrian (?) hand ; virtually serifless ; strong horizontal character.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, 10 V(100), VI (112), III (118), I (120), i ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied in cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular and triangular, reads: "وافق الفراغ من نسخ هذه الحكم يوم الاحد سلخ رجب الحرام المبارك الذي هو من شهور سنة ثمان وميتين والف من الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلاة وازكى السلام واسنى التحية على يد كاتبها الحقير الكسير الفاني خضر بن يوسف النابلسي العقرباني استكتابا الى اخيه الحاج محمد الخياط جعل في حفظ الاسباط آمين آمين والحمد لله رب العالمين عامله الله بالطافه الخفية وثبت جنانه على هذه الملة الحنفية وسلك به طريق الاسعار وبلغه اقصى المرار الحمد لولي الحمد حمدا يفوق حمد الحامدين على ممر السنين والشهور والايام والساعات وابد الابدين وسلم تسليما كثيرا الى يوم الدين الحمد لله رب العالمين آمين م م م"', 'Explicit: "وما تحقق العارف بنيل المقام وسلم تسليما كثيرا على ممر الايام امين امين امين والحمد لله رب العالمين "', 'Incipit: "وهو حسبي وعليه اتوكل وفوضت الامر اليه فالتفويض للعبد اجمل ... وبعد فهذه نبذة يسيرة من المعارف والحكم"', 'Title from inscription on fol.1a (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Collection of pithy wise sayings and prayers. Description provided by Alison Vacca.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 428', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.242, copied by Ahmet bin İbrahim ül-Üsküdarî ( احمد بن ابراهيم الاسكدارى / Aḥmad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Uskudārī ) with transcription completed in the latter part of Shawwāl 1090 [December 1679].', 'Former shelfmark: "۱۲۳" in black ink on upper cover label ; "٦٥" in pencil on recto of front flyleaf ; "404 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "238" in pencil on \'title page\' (p.7).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings and flyleaves (as well as lining of envelope flap) in pink silver-flecked paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped (dark brown recessed onlays) and gold-painted scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OAi 2) and pendants, as well as gold tooled and painted accents (rosettes and radiating strokes) and guilloché roll border ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, fair condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with upper cover fully detached, lifting of leather at fore edge flap, minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with roughly 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical or horizontal, somewhat indistinct) and occasional chain lines faintly visible, thin and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished, beige in color (lighter and darker shades).', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.8, consisting of rectangular piece with central cartouche carrying title in white (partially effaced, reads "... قصيده المنفرجه الشريفه") on a gold ground flanked by floral motifs in red and gold and bordered in a turquoise band with white accents, surmounted by a scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) with swirling floral motifs in white, red, orange, pink, lavender, and light blue on a gold ground, set into a well of red, gold and heavy pink bands and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue with floral accents ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by heavy gold frame outlined by black fillets and set off by gold cloud-bands ; elsewhere written area surrounded by a narrower gold frame ; textual dividers in the form of gold rosettes and gold discs ; keywords rubricated ; illuminated tailpiece at close on p.242, consisting of swirling floral motifs in pink and gold flanking the text.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand ; partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serif mainly on lām, effect of tilt to the left, open and closed counters, mainly curvilinear descenders, pointing in conjoined dots, fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iii, 12 V(120), I (122), iii ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (includes inner flyleaves and skips two pages each between pp.103-104 and 205-206).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular and rectangular, reads "تمت القصيدة المباركة المسمى بالمنفرجه في اواخر شهر شوال من سهور سنه تسعين والف من هجرة من له العزة والشرف اللهم صل وسلم على شرف الخلق ... حرره العبد الحقير المحتاج الى رحمة ربه الرحيم البارى احمد بن ابراهيم الاسكدارى"', 'Explicit: "وحضرت علينك رضى الله تعالى عنه مدحنه متعلق اولان بيتله تمام ايدوب ختم قلديسه زياده تحريره حاجت قلميوب بونك شرحى دخى بو محلده ختم اولوب نهايت بولدى الحمد لله على التمام والصلوة والسلام على رسوله افضل الانام ... والله هو الرؤف الرحيم وهو حسبى ونعم الوكيل غفرانك ربنا واليك النصير"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعل الصبر على اشتداد الازمة والاذى مفتاحا للفرج ... اما بعد بو جريدۀ لطيفۀ نك تأليف وتحريرنه هادى وبو قصيدۀ شريفۀ نك شرح وتفسيرنه باعث وبادى ... وبوكه حكم مندرجه في شرح منفرجه ديمكله نام ويردم ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.11.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Turkish commentary by İsmail Ankaravî Rasühî Dede (d.1632) on al-Qaṣīdah al-Munfarijah, an invocational poem by Ibn al-Naḥwī (d.1119).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 966', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 115', 'Binding: Boards covered in black textured cloth ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a geometric pattern (resembling a scale pattern) in dull gold ; cover gold-stamped with "الحكمة" ; sewn in white thread over two recessed cords ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Machine laid and wove paper of a few types ; opening type (through p.8 and again pp.25-32) machine laid, lined, with watermark of "GOUVERNEMENT EGYPTIEN" with star and crescent at center and other smaller crescents with three stars (see pp.2, 4, etc. and compare Walz, "The Paper trade of Egypt and the Sudan," p.91) ; next type (pp.9-24, 33-40) also machine laid but unlined, no watermarks visible ; finally (p.41 to close) still another type, wove, unlined with same watermark of "GOUVERNEMENT EGYPTIEN" with star and crescent at center and other smaller crescents with three stars (see pp.42, 44, etc. and again compare Walz).', 'Decoration: Text executed entirely in red ink apart from that on pp.25-31, 39.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; careful, compact hand in a medium to bold line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 17-22 lines per page.', "Collation: i, 6 II(24), i ; exclusively binions ; pages between sections (corresponding to gatherings) left blank, some serving as 'title pages' (see pp.8,9, 17, 25) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, presumably supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "الوقوف الصادق الوقوف مع مراد الحق الزمرد النقي"', 'Incipit: "الغراب كناية عن جسم الكل الغنى الملك التام والغنى للذات لا يكون الا للحق اما الغني من العباد فهو من استغنى بالحق ...الظل هو الوجود الاضا في الظاهر ... ذو العقل هو الذي يرى الخلق ظاهرا والحق باطنا ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of what may represent abridged excerpts from al-Kalimāt al-maḍnūnah bi-hā ʻan ghayr ahlihā by Muḥsin-i Fayz̤-i Kāshānī (d.1679) known as Mullā Muḥsin, a student of Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī (d.1641).'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Andrea Galvani of Pordenone; eagle with letters A and FNF in roman. For the first see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 36 and 860.', 'Tables rubricated.', 'Possible date of late 15th cent.-early 16th cent. based on coverage of calendrical tables.', 'Astronomical tables for the latitude of Cairo based on the Raṣd of Ulugh Beg (1349-1449), including calendrical tables for the years 871-931 [1466-1525].'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 831', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon, though date 1257 [1841 or 2] appears in text (pp.16, 20, and 38) ; statement signed Emin Efendi and dated 1848 provides a terminus ante quem of 1848 ; paper, etc. certainly suggest 19th century.', 'Binding: Marbled paper cover (mainly in blue and brown, single sheet, limp binding without boards) ; sewn in heavy dark blue to black thread, eight stations ; overall in somewhat poor condition with some abrasion, staining, tears losses, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper (as well as a few bifolia in wove paper) ; mainly with 13-14 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart (vertical), beige, sturdy and well-burnished ; another type with 12-13 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 23-24 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of arms / shield with crown above (see p.6, etc.).', 'Decoration: Headings, keywords, numerals and other symbols rubricated ; written area of many pages surrounded by rule-border ; many diagrams and tables, as well as two colored illustrations showing ships at sea (see p.9 and p.11).', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; fairly clear Turkish hand ; serifless with slight effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, highly ligatured, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, closed counters ; notes in several other hands.', 'Layout: Highly variable, as written area often contains diagrams, tables or lines of arithmetic along with problem statement.', 'Collation: XVIII (36) ; single gathering of 18 bifolia ; some leaves ruled but left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Carefully executed physics (physical sciences or natural sciences, i.e. hikmet-i tabiiye) notebook containing numerous sample problems (with problem statement, solution and any diagrams), tables and notes.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1008', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.71, executed by Derviş İbrahim b. Hafız Halil with transcription completed 1129 [1716 or 17].', 'Accompanying materials: "a. Two 5 x 7 catalog cards bearing above description of item. -- b. Letter, Warner G. Rice (Director, General Library, U of M) to Mr. Richard Ford of Detroit, 20 July 1951. In the letter Rice acknowledges receipt of a 16 July note from Ford which included a copy of a letter obtained by Ford from G. M. Meredith-Owens, Brit. Mus. Dept. of Oriental Printed Books and Manuscripts, presumably authenticating (and describing?) the work in hand. Ford\'s letter may have asked what research institutions in the United States might be interested in acquiring the text. Rice writes: "There are several research institutions in the Unites States which have made some special attempts to collect materials on and about the Near East. Among these I suppose the most distinguished is Princeton, though a good deal has been done at the University of Chicago also. At the University of Michigan we have specialized for a long time in Coptic materials, but we are now extending our interests, especially through the activities of Professor Cameron, who has recently become head of our Department of Near Eastern Languages...The General Library is now making rather extensive purchases of materials in Turkish, Persian, and Arabic. Last fall we acquired a large collection 19 of such materials and shall doubtless continue to build in this field. I can assure you that if you were to offer the Arabic manuscript which Mr. Owens describes to the University of Michigan we should be very glad indeed to have it." -- c. Note on pink slip of paper in handwriting of Harriet Jameson: "From Mr. Wagman 12-22-61. Is this the missing manuscript? No. In his vault. Keep anyway." -- d. Small Univ. of Mich. campus mail envelope addressed "Islamic MS," containing small fragment of a book binding: filigree cut gilded leather on cloth" - from handlist prepared by R. Dougherty, 1993, only cards carrying description still with manuscript.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 157', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures (board linings) and interior of flap in spring green textile (possibly silk), flyleaves and hinges in pink-tinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, reminiscent of Déroche class. OAi 10) with gold-tooled rosette accents and guilloché roll border ; sewn in dull pink thread, two stations ; overall in somewhat poor condition with lifting and losses of leather (particularly at pine, spine lining exposed), abrasion, staining, minor delamination of boards, minor pest damage, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with roughly 14 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 19 mm. (vertical) and no watermarks visible (perhaps lost to trimming), beige in color, sturdy though thin and transluscent, well-sized and burnished ; flyleaves in a different European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Fine illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.8 consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral accents, surmounted by dome or semi-circular piece filled with swirling floral decoration in gold with black outline, white, red and orange-red on fields of gold and dark blue (cobalt), all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in red and blue and set in a well of gold, red and blue bands with white crosses ; additional illuminated headpieces at section openings throughout the manuscript ; written area surrounded by gold frame defined by black fillets ; textual dividers in the form of gold rosettes with red and blue accents.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, well-formed Ottoman hand in a medium line ; mainly serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, many open counters, pointing mainly in conjoined dots, extensively vocalized (mainly Arabic passages).', 'Layout: Written mainly in 9-11 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iii, 3 V(30), II (34), iii ; almost exclusively quinions ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "كتبه اضعف الضعفاء درويش ابراهيم ابن حافظ خليل حامدا لله تعالى ومصليا على نبيه محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين سنة تسع وعشرين ومائة والف من هجرة النبوية"', 'Explicit: "شفاعتلرين احسان وصحبتلريله شرفياب ايليه امين يا معين"', 'Incipit: "اعوذ بالله من الشيطان الرجيم بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الحمد هر حمد وافرين كه ازلدن ابده دك موجود ومعلوم اولدى ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '7. p.67-p.71 : Nat-i Damad-i Resulullah [or Hilye-yi Hazret-i Ali].', '6. p.64-p.66 : Nat-i Osman [or Hilye-yi Osman].', '5. p.61-p.64 : Nat-i Faruk yani Ömer [or Hilye-yi Ömer ].', '4. p.59-p.61 : Nat-i Yar-i Gar-i Sıddık [or Hilye-yi Ebübekir].', '3. p.16-58 : [Hilye-yi şerif].', '2. p.13-p.16 : [Asmāʼ al-Nabī].', '1. p.8-p.12 : [elucidation of the Fātiḥah in Turkish].', "A fine specimen of Ottoman calligraphy comprising devotional material in Arabic and Turkish, opening with a Turkish elucidation of Sūrat al-Fātiḥah, followed by the names of the Prophet, description of the Prophet's characteristics (or hilye text, opening with the text related by ʻAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib) with Turkish elucidation, and similar descriptions for each of the four rightly guided Caliphs (Çihâryâr-i Güzin)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 238', 'Origin: As appears at close, calligraphy executed by ʻUthmān, known as Ḥāfiẓ Kalām al-Wahhāb (i.e. Hafız Osman Efendi) in 1099 [1687 or 8]. Decoration and earlier mounting likely 18th century. Most recent mounting and borders likely 19th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "546 T.D.M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" in pencil on reverse of uppermost panel ; "113" in pencil in border adjacent to illuminated headpiece.', 'Binding: The three pieced panels of the levha are mounted on boards backed with silk, edged and hinged together with red-brown leather, unfolding like a triptych but vertically ; some repairs to the edging in purple leather ; minor hinge repairs in Japanese paper.', 'Support: European laid paper, well-burnished, pieced and mounted on boards.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) appears in a rectangular panel above the baş makam, consisting of a semi-circular piece (dome) filled with a depiction of al-Masjid al-Ḥarām at Mecca (kaʻbah visible) and set off by an outer border of swirling vegetal designs in white, lavender, mint green, pink, gold, etc. on a blue ground with heavy gold and black borders and surmounting vertical stalks (tīgh) ; the same vegetal designs fill the area around the göbek and the koltuklar ; a black and gold frame surrounds the uppermost rectangular panel, the baş makam, the square containing the göbek, hilâl (in gold), and names of the çiharyâr, the ayet and the etek ; bands of turquoise and gold surround the circles with names of the çiharyâr ; textual dividers in the form of illuminated rosettes accent the hilye text ; a heavy border in olive green with gold painted floral accents, itself set-off by white fillets and framed by black and gold bands, surrounds the entire levha.', 'Script: Exquisite specimen of Ottoman calligraphy ; basmalah (besmele), āyah (ayet) and names of the first four caliphs (çiharyâr) in thuluth (sülüs) ; hilye texts (of the göbek and etek) in naskh (nesih).', 'Layout: Baș makam with besmele (opening with "انه من سليمان وانه" in small cartouche above "بسم") ; göbek with 9 lines of text ; ayet in a single line ; etek with 4 lines of text.', "Collation: Three 'panels' (likely once a single levha, now pieced) hinged together with red-brown leather, opening for display as a levha.", 'Colophon: "كتبه اضعف الكتاب عثمان المعروف بحافظ كلام الوهاب سنه تسع وتسعين والف"', 'Explicit: "يقول ناعته لم ار قبله ولا بعده مثله صلى الله عليه وسلم"', 'Incipit: "عن علي كان اذا وصف النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم قال لم يكن بالطويل الممغط ولا بالقصير المتردد ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. (three panels hinged together).', 'Exquisite hilye (written depiction of the Prophet) executed by the master who developed this graphic form of the hilye, Hafız Osman Efendi (d.1698). Decoration and mounting later, likely in at least two distinct stages (18th and 19th century).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 523', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.460, copied by Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Mīrzā [?] al-Ḥanafī with transcription completed 13 Muḥarram 1122 [ca. 14 March 1710].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2) -- b. Scrap tag with title (pp. 37-38) -- c. Insert with notes (pp.349-50).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 98b" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted paper ; upper and lower covers carry tooled border ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations, many broken ; overall in poor condition with staining and abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, moisture damage, upper cover detaching, fore edge flap far too small, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 18-20 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of grapes (raisin) under cartouche with "B A" [?] and crown (see p.42, 43, etc.) ; thin and transluscent though sturdy, medium cream in color, well-burnished ; some ink burn.', 'Decoration: Some keywords, abbreviation symbols, section headings and text being commented upon rubricated ; other keywords, section headings and notabilia (side-heads) large and bolded (often set apart even) in black, blue or green ink ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', "Script: Naskh ; small, clear 'Syrian' or Turkish hand [?] in a medium line ; extensively seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs, quite rounded with curvilinear descenders, slight inclination to the left, point of nūn set deep in bowl, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf), and pointing in distinct dots and strokes.", 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 4 (4), 22 V(224), III (230) ; almost exclusively quinions ; four added leaves at opening ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts, added leaves and flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "نجز شرح الحصن الحصين لشيخ الاسلام ... محمد بن محمد بن محمد الجزري الشافعي ... ورضي الله عن شارحه فانه اجاد فيما اتى به وكان لهذا الحصن كمسك الختام لانه قد فتح مغلقه وابان رموزه وحل مشكله اسكنه الله اعلى فراديس الجنان ... وكان ذلك على يد احقرعباد الله واحوجهم الى غفرانه احمد بن محمد بن مرزا الحنفي ... وكان تحريرا في يوم الجمعة ثالث عشر محرم الحرام سنة الف ومائة واثنين وعشرين تمت م م م"', 'Explicit: "ولكن المعتمد انه يحصل اصل السنة بذكر الرجل او المرأة والله الهادي الى الصواب واليه المرجع والمآب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعل ذكره حصنا حصينا من كل باب ودعاه حرز امينا للثواب ... اما بعد فيقول افقر عباد الله الغني واحوجهم الى كرمه الوفي ولطفه الحفي علي بن سلطان محمد الهروي ... ان هذا شرح متوسط غير مخل ولا ممل للعالمين على كتاب الحصن الحصين لشيخ القراء والمحدثين .... الشيخ محمد بن محمد بن محمد الجزري ... وسميته بالحرز الثمين للحصن الحصين حيث يبين ضبظ مبانيه ..."', 'Title from opening on p.12.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of al-Qārī al-Harawī’s (d.1605 or 6) commentary al-Ḥirz al-thamīn on al-Jazarī’s (d.1429) al-Ḥiṣn al-Ḥaṣīn, a devotional work with ḥadīth employed for prayer. Includes contents listing for an introduction on prayer and dhikr at opening (pp.8-9) and a brief text included by the copyist of the exemplar at close (pp.461-463).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 54', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon. Paper suggests 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Various inserts, mainly scraps with little to no writing but also a folded document (paginated pp.5-6, pp.67-68/the document, pp.253-254, and pp.273-274).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 14. Hisn al-hasin." ; on tail of textblock "٣٦" ; on interior of upper cover and fol.1a (p.1) "١٩".', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in paper ; upper and lower covers carrying blind-stamped scalloped mandorla with recessed paper onlay, filled with floral vegetal composition, along with blind-stamped rosette accents and border in incised fillets ; sewn in cream thread, mainly two stations, alternately sewn from two central stations through location where primaries would be sewn ; endbands entirely gone ; in poor condition with sever moisture damage, shrinkage, staining, abrasion, ill-fitting flap (small) ; assorted repairs.', 'Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 21-22 mm. apart ; watermark of grapes with banner and crown above ; lightly burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords rubricated ; text being commented upon overlined in red ; occasional textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand ; frequent right-sloping head-serifs ; effect of tilt to the left ; many closed counters ; many descenders quite rounded (majmūʻah) ; point of final nūn often assimilated with bowl ; occasional superscripting at end of line.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 15 VI (180), V (190) ; chiefly sexternions ; last two leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in Hindu-Arabic numerals (off) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly skips from p.171 to p.180).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," rectangular, reads: "وانتهى فراغ تحرير هذا الشرح وتنميقه بعون الله تعالى وتوفيقه بمكة المشرفة قبالة القبلة المعظمة في النصف الاخير من جمادى الاخرى من شهور عام همان بعد الالف من الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها الاف صلاة والوف تحية والحمد لله الذي بنعمته تتم الصالحات ... ويرحم الله عبدا قال امينا"', 'Explicit: "والحمد لله اولا واخرا وباطنا وظاهرا وصلاته وفي نسخة على سيند الخلق وفي نسخة واشرفهم محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلام اي سلام الله تعالى كذلك عليه وعليهم انتهى"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعل ذكره حصنا حصينا من كل باب ودعاه حرز امينا للثواب ... اما بعد فيقول [افقر] عباد الله الغني واحوجهم الى كرمه الوفي ولطفه الحفي علي بن سلطان محمد الهروي ... ان هذا شرح متوسط غير مخل ولا ممل للطالبين على كتاب الحصن [الحصين لشيخ] القراء والمحدثين ... الشيخ محمد بن محمد الجزري ... برد الله مضجعه وافاض علينا من مدده ... [سميته الحرز] الثمين للحصن الحصين حيث يبين ضبظ مبانيه ..."', 'Title from opening on fol.1b (p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant though much damaged copy of al-Qārī al-Harawī's commentary al-Ḥirz al-thamīn on al-Jazarī's al-Ḥiṣn al-Ḥaṣīn, a devotional work."])

en: (count: ['On p. [1], illuminated ʻunwān and opening; text vocalized and rubricated and enclosed in gold borders.', "Date and copyist's name in colophon: sawwadahu al-faqīr al-sayyid ʻUthmān al-maʻrūf bi-Ḥāfiẓ al-Qurʼān ... sanat ithnā wa-thamānūn wa-miʼah wa-alf.", 'Collections of sayings of the Prophet Muḥammad, derived from earlier collections of sound traditions, used for prayer.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 42', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon. Paper would suggest late 18th or early 19th century. Date in seal impression on fol.75b (p.148) provides a rough terminus ante quem of 1846 or 7.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 149. Al-Hizb al-azam, Dalail al-khairat, etc."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in a yellow-tinted paper ; upper and lower covers bear fine stamped, red and gold-painted scalloped mandorla with vegetal composition (compare Deroche class. NSd 7) and gold painted accents, along with gold-painted roll border in a series of s-shaped stamps and gold fillets ; sewn in dingy grey thread (once pink?), two stations ; endbands virtually lost, only traces of primaries remain ; in poor condition with abrasion, staining, lifting and detaching of leather (particularly at spine), flap lost, boards exposed and delaminating at corners, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with roughly 13 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 29 mm. apart (horizontal) ; watermark of grapes with crown above ; staining and smudging.', 'Decoration: Simple illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) on fol.1b (p.1) and on p.72 (nearly identical) consisting of rectangular piece surmounted by semi-circular (dome) piece ; rectangular piece carries the basmalah in a cartouche defined by flanking accents in gold ; scalloped semi-circular piece carries swirling floral vegetal pattern in white, pink, red and black on a field of gold, outlined in blue and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; headpiece is set in a well of red and gold bands outlined by black fillets with blue and white circular accents ; written area of incipit and facing page bordered in gold frame ; elsewhere written area surrounded by red rule-border ; textual dividers in the form of gold discs ; incomplete diagram showing the tombs of Muḥammad, Abū Bakr and ʻUmar on fol.43a (p.83) ; text rubricated with section headings, keywords, overlining, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh influenced by nastaʻlīq ; fine Turkish or Persian hand ; sans serif ; effect of tilt to the right ; words often descending to baseline ; mainly closed counters ; kāf mashkūlah preferred ; horizontal strokes usually in heavier line and often elongated.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: 3 V(30), V-4 (36), V-1 (45), 2 V(65), VI (77) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords occasionally present (last word of final line recto repeating on following verso) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between pp.1-2, mistakenly repeats p.91, and skips from p.107 to 109).', 'Explicit: [al-Ḥizb al-aʻẓam] "اللهم صلى على محمد عبدك ورسولك النبي الامي الذي آمن بك وبكتابك واعطه افضل رحمتك واته الشرف على خلقك يوم القيامة واجزه خير الجزاء والسلام عليه ورحمة الله وبركاته" [Dalāʼil al-khayrāt] "صلى الله على سيدنا محمد خاتم النبيين وامام المرسلين وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم تسليمأ والحمد لله رب العالمين وهو حسبنا ونعم الوكيل"', 'Incipit: [al-Ḥizb al-aʻẓam] "الحمد لله الذي دعانا للايمان وهدانا بالقرآن واجاب دعوتنا بالفضل والاحسان ... اما بعد فيقول العبد الداعي الراجي مغفرة ربه الباري علي بن سلطان محمد القاري ستر عيوبهما لما رايت بعض السالكين يتعلقون باوراد المشياخ المعتبرين ... فخطر ببالي ان اجمع الدعوات الماثورة في الاحاديث المشهورة ... وسميته الحزب الاعظم لانتسابه واستناده الى الرسول الاكرم ..." [Dalāʼil al-khayrāt] "وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وسلم قال الشيخ الفقيه الامام العالم سيدي ابو عبد الله محمد بن سليمان الجزولي رحمه الله تعالى الحمد لله الذي هدانا للايمان والاسلام والصلاة والسلام على محمد نبيه ... وبعد فالغرض في هذا الكتاب ذكر الصلاة على النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم وفضائلها اذكرها محذوفة الاسانيد ليسهل حفظها على القاري وهي من اهم المهمات لمن يريد القرب من رب الارباب وسميته بكتاب دلائل الخيرات وشوارق الانوار في ذكر الصلاة على النبي المختار صلى الله عليه وسلم ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '5. fol.76a-fol.77b : [assorted prayers, originally blank].', '4. fol.37b-fol.75b : Dalāʼil al-khayrāt wa-shawāriq al-anwār fī dhikr al-ṣalāh ʻalá al-nabī al-mukhtār / al-Jazūlī.', '3. fol.32b-fol.37a : [assorted prayers, originally blank].', '2. fol.2b-fol.32a : al-Ḥizb al-aʻẓam wa-al-wird al-afkham / al-Qārī al-Harawī.', '1. fol.1a-fol.2a : [assorted prayers, originally blank].', "Fine prayerbook containing al-Qārī al-Harawī's al-Ḥizb al-aʻẓam followed by the celebrated Dalāʼil al-khayrāt of al-Jazūlī, with numerous assorted prayers and remedies on the remaining leaves."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 522', 'Origin: As appears in colophons on p.183 and p.184, both texts copied by Muḥammad Darwīsh al-Āmidi (Mehmet Derviș el-Amidî), known as al-Ḥājj Darwīshʻzādah (Hacı Dervişzade) though date of transcription is not specified. Paper suggests early 19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Two inventory cataloguing slips in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 100" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown to black leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in blue-tinted paper ; doublure hinges in decorative paper (black with vegetal design in orange) ; upper and lower covers carry gold-stamped central mandorla (filled with vegetal decoration) , pendants and cornerpieces with accents in numerous blind-tooled rosettes and gold-tooled guilloché roll border ; sewn in golden yellow thread, four stations ; only traces of primaries remain at head, endbands otherwise gone ; overall in fair to poor condition with abrasion, lifting and losses of gold leaf, leather and board linings, etc. ; repairs to spine and foreedge flap in dark brown leather.', 'Support: European laid paper with 13 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 27 mm. apart (vertical), and watermarks including lion passant guardant (see p.156, etc.) and "G A" [or "V G" ?] (compare nos. 986, 987, etc. in Eineder, The ancient paper-mills) ; beige or dark cream in color, heavily burnished to glossy, thin and transluscent though quite sturdy ; some moisture damage with loss of text (see p.76, etc.).', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpieces (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at openings on p.2 for al-Ḥizb al-aʻẓam and excerpt from ʻUddat al-Ḥiṣn al-ḥaṣīn (in margin) as well as at opening on p.4 for text of al-Ḥiṣn al-ḥaṣīn (in margin) ; all consisting of w-shaped piece [al-Ḥizb al-aʻẓam/al-Ḥiṣn al-ḥaṣīn] or scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) [excerpt from ʻUddat al-Ḥiṣn al-ḥaṣīn] filled with simple floral vegetal decoration in gold, orange, pink, and red on fields of light blue, pink, green-blue and orange set in wells of yellow, green-blue, or pink with red or black accents, surmounting gold rectangular pieces carrying the titles in white (now mainly lost), and themselves surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in red and black ; central written area surrounded by gold frame, margins also outlined by gold rules ; use of gold cloud-bands in central written area on incipit and facing page ; textual dividers in the form of gold discs (central written area and margins) ; keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand ; virtually serifless with very slight effect of tilt to the left, rounded with curvilinear descenders, rightward descenders tapered, fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 37 lines per page with central written area carrying 11 lines of al-Ḥizb al-aʻẓam and 26 lines of al-Ḥiṣn al-ḥaṣīn on the diagonal in the margins (13 upper-outer, 13 outer-lower) ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 8 V(80), 2 III(92) ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present for text of main written area ; text of margins lacks proper catchwords but last word of final line on the verso of each leaf is usually repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: [al-Ḥiṣn al-ḥaṣīn] "تمت الحصن الحصين بعون الله وتوفيقه عن يد اضعف العباد السيد محمد درويش الامدى الشهير بالحج درويش زاده غفر الله له ولوالديه ولاقربائه ولجميع المؤمنين والمؤمنات الاحياء منهم والاموات" ; [al-Ḥizb al-aʻẓam] "قد تم الحزب الاعظم عن يد اضعف العباد السيد محمد درويش الامدى غفر الله له ولوالديه ولاقربائه ولجميع المؤمنين والمؤمنات والمسلمين والمسلمات"', 'Explicit: [al-Ḥiṣn al-ḥaṣīn] "ولا يدفعه سواك اللهم فرج عنا يا كريم يا ارحم الراحمين والحمد لله رب العالمين" ; [al-Ḥizb al-aʻẓam] "اللهم صل على سيدنا محمد عبدك ورسولك النبي الامي الذي آمن بك وبكتابك واعطه افضل رحمتك واته الشرف على على [كذا] خلقك يوم القيامة واجزه خير الجزاء والسلام عليه ورحمة الله وبركاته سبحان ربك رب العزة عما يصفون وسلام على المرسلين والحمد لله رب العالمين م م م"', 'Incipit: [al-Ḥizb al-aʻẓam] "الحمد لله الذي دعانا للايمان وهدانا بالقرآن واجاب دعوتنا بالفضل والاحسان ... اما بعد فيقول العبد الداعي الراجي مغفرة ربه الباري علي بن سلطان محمد القاري ستر عيوبهما وغفر ذنوبهما لما رايت بعض السالكين يتعلقون باوراد المشياخ المعتبرين ... فخطر ببالي ان اجمع الدعوات الماثورة في الاحاديث المنشورة ...وهذا الجمع الذي هو معدن الدعاء ... وسميته الحزب الاعظم والورد الافخم لانتسابه واستناده الى الرسول الاكرم ..." ; [excerpt from ʻUddat al-Ḥiṣn al-ḥaṣīn] "الحمد لله رب العالمين ربنا اتنا من لدنك رحمة انك انت الوهاب قال الشيخ الامام ... شهاب الدين احمد بن علي بن حجر العسقلاني الشافعي المصري قال صاحب الشيخ الامام ... تاج القراء " ; [al-Ḥiṣn al-ḥaṣīn] "قال الشيخ الامام العالم العلامة ... شمس الدين محمد بن الشيخ شمس الدين محمد بن محمد الجزري فسح الله تعالى في مدته واعاد علينا وعلى المسلمين من بركته اما بعد حمد الله الذي جعل الدعاء لرد القضاء ... فان هذا الحصن الحصين من كلام سيد المرسلين وسلاح المؤمنين من خزانة النبي الامين والهيكل العظيم من قول الرسول الكريم ... واخرجته من الاحاديث الصحيحة ابرزته عدة عن كل شدة ... وقد رمزت للكتب التي خرجت منها هذه الاحاديث بحروف تدل على ذلك ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on interior of upper cover and openings for each work.', 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.183-p.184 : [prayer].', '3. p.4-p.183 : al-Ḥiṣn al-ḥaṣīn min kalām sayyid al-mursalīn / Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Jazarī.', '2. p.2-p.3 : [excerpt from ʻUddat al-Ḥiṣn al-ḥaṣīn] / Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Jazarī', '1. p.2-p.184 : al-Ḥizb al-aʻẓam wa-al-wird al-afkham / ʻAlī ibn Sulṭān Muḥammad al-Qārī al-Harawī.', "Elegant prayerbook containing al-Qārī al-Harawī's (d.1605) al-Ḥizb al-aʻẓam wa-al-wird al-afkham with Ibn al-Jazarī's (d.833/1429) al-Ḥiṣn al-ḥaṣīn min kalām Sayyid al-mursalīn, a collection of ḥadīth employed in prayer, in the margins. al-Ḥiṣn al-ḥaṣīn is preceded by an excerpt from the author's abrigdment ʻUddat al-Ḥiṣn al-ḥaṣīn (pp.2-3) and followed by an additional prayer (pp.183-184)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 368', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; hand, paper, etc. suggest late 18th or possibly early 19th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "346 T. D. M. [T. Dell ?]" inscribed in pencil on recto of opening leaf (p.1) ; "243" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.3).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red brown leather with red leather over spine ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in red laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla filled with vegetal composition (compare Déroche class OSd 1) with pendants and tooled border consisting of a heavy gold band in a series of s-shape stamps flanked by two thin gold fillets inside and outside ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations ; worked endbands in red and yellow thread in a chevron pattern ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion and lifting of leather on the hinges.', 'Support: European laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (mainly vertical), chain lines (horizontal or vertical) spaced roughly 25 mm. apart, and watermark only faintly visible at gutter (very tightly bound, see p.244, 298, 300, etc.) ; well-burnished ; thin and crisp.', "Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of Hulasatü't-tebyin on p.4 consisting of a rectangular piece with cartouche outlined in gold carrying the ḥamdalah in black ink, surmounted by a gold rectangular piece with a cartouche carrying the title in red ink, itself surmounted by a scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) filled with floral and vegetal designs in orange, red, pale purple, blue, yellow, and pale green, all set in a well consisting of thick orange and blue bands and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; simple illuminated headpieces at opening of second work (p.246) and third work (p.268) each consisting of a scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) with floral motifs and surmounting tīgh all in gold ; written area surrounded by a thick gold band outlined in black with outer fillets of black and red ; textual dividers in gold discs and red inverted commas ; Qurʼānic excerpts overlined in red.", 'Script: Naskh ; neat, compact Turkish hand in a thin line ; serifless with slight inclination to the left, curvilnear descenders, kāf mashqūqah preferred, Qurʼānic passages vocalized ; excerpt on pp.243-244 in a different hand.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: VI (12), 14 V(304) ; opening senion followed by quinions ; leaves between works left blank ; oblique catchwords on the verso of each leaf ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloging.', 'Colophon: [Hulasatü\'t-tebyin] Authorial, reads "غب هذا اشبو خلاصة التبيين في تفسير سورة يس ايله نام زد اولان كتاب كزين تاريخ رنتم و تزبار عقبنده كى عدد تامك اول ثلث ثانيسنك آخرى سنه سنده بعون الله الملك العلام رسيدۀ حسن ختام اولدى م" ; [Tefsir Âyetü\'l-Kürsî] Authorial, reads "لقد كمل ما نمقته في هذه الكراسه بالاعتماد علي اقوا من هو الراقي الي رتبه الاستاد في بلده هي صيغه المصدر لفعل الجهاد ... تو ضيحه ان تاريخ الختام هى الغاية الحاوية ... وبهذا النمط يعلم المدد خذ هذا التوضيح وكن به فريحا م" ; [Nasriye] Authorial, reads "اشبو اسم نصريه ايله مسمى اولان رسالۀ فاخره تاريخ رسول اكرم ونبى محترم صلى الله عليه و سلم حضرتلرينك الف ثانيسنك ثانئ مات عشره سنك جزؤ اخير عشرات خامسه سنك اجزاي اثلاث اربعه سندن ثلث ثالثنك ثانئ احاد اسبوعنك ارباع سته سنك اخر ربع ثانيسي كه يوم احدك قبيل وقت عصرنده تمام و بو كونه توريخ نوين ايله رسيدۀ حسن تدوين اولدى والحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة على رسوله الامين وآله وصحبه اجمعين آمين تم"', 'Explicit: [Hulasatü\'t-tebyin] "و عنايت ايليوب انوار قلب قران ايله قلوبمزي منور ايليه بجاه طمويس عليه افضل صلوات الله الملك المعين" ; [Tefsir-i Âyetü\'l-Kürsî] "وصلى الله على من هو حبيبه ورسوله وعلي الال والاصحاب والتابعين رضوان الله تعالى عليهم اجمعين" ; [Nasriye] "بيوريلورسه سر افتخارم فلك الافلاكه برابراولمق امر مقدردر وما ذلك على الله بعزيز ... اسئلك اللهم غبطا لاهبطا"', 'Incipit: [Hulasatü\'t-tebyin] "سبحان من سلخ من ليل البشرية نهار الروحانية ثم قدر لقمر القلب منازل العرفان مستفيضا من شمس نور الرحمانية ..." ; [Tefsir-i Âyetü\'l-Kürsî] "حمد بيقياس وبيحد وشكر وسپاس لا يعد من الازل الى الابد اول آفريده كار ششن جهت وزمين و آسمان ... بعد هذا بو عبد حقير كثير العصيان محمد اسعد ناتوان استدعاى اخوان خلان ايله اعظم آيات فرقان عظيم الشان اولان آية كرسينك تفسيرينى وفضائل جليله وجزيله سنى لسان تركى ايله تعبير وتحرير وحسب الطاقة تقريره شروع وابتدا ايلدم بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم ..." ; [Nasriye] "حمد وثناء بيقياس وهزار وهزار [كذا] درود وسپاس پاروچۀ آفريدن و تكيونده طينت ستوده هيئت ادمى ... بو نعمت وعنايتى تحديث ايجون بدايت قرآن كريمدن نهايتنه دكين ذكر كروۀ جناب رب الارباب اولان آيات نصر وظفرى مع قلة البضاعة وقصر الباعة جمع وترقيم واسم نصريه ايله تسميه وتوسيم ايدوب ..."', 'Title from illuminated headpiece at opening (p.4).', 'Ms. codex.', '6. p.268-p.302 : Nasriye / Ebu İshak Efendizade Mehmet Esat Efendi.', '5. p.262-p.267 : [blank].', "4. p. 246-p.261 : [Tefsir-i Âyetü'l-Kürsî] / Ebu İshak Efendizade Mehmet Esat Efendi.", '3. p.245 : [blank].', '2. p.243-p.244 : [excerpt from Tafsīr Rūḥ al-bayān of Bursalı İsmail Hakkı].', "1. p.4-p.242 : Hulasatü't-tebyin fi tefsir-i Suret Yasin / Ebu İshak Efendizade Mehmet Esat Efendi.", 'Elegant copy of a collection (mecmua / majmūʻah) of three works of tafsīr by the Ottoman şeyhülislâm Mehmet Esat Efendi (d.1752 or 3) son of Șeyhülislâm Ebu İshak İsmâil. Descriptive contributions from Nick Krabbenhoeft.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 401', 'Origin: As appears in colophon, copy executed by Mehmet Vasfi (i.e. Kebecizade Mehmet Vasfi Efendi, d. 1831) student of Ebubekir Raşit Efendi (d.1782). Date of transcription not specified, though date in watermark suggests ca. 1772 ; decoration, hand, etc. are consistent with late 18th century dating.', 'Former shelfmark: "469 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark royal blue leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in sky blue surface-dyed, textured and coated paper (embossed with scrolling vegetal designs) ; upper and lower covers carry central gold-flecked cartouche with gold-painted cornerpieces and stamped borders of gold defined by gold fillets ; sewn in pale yellow thread, two stations ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion ; repairs in blue Japanese paper.', 'Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-24 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of griffin [?], "FIN DE LA SONE EN DAUPHINE" and "1772" ; well-sized and burnished, thin and crisp though sturdy, buff (dull yellow) in color.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening consisting of a composition of vegetal forms (resembling plumes) in white with shades of lavender, blue, pink, etc. accents surmounted by floral forms in shades of pink with green leaves, all on a gold ground set in a well defined by red and yellow interlace ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by a heavy gold frame with inner and outer gold bands defined by black fillets and outermost blue fillet ; written area elsewhere surrounded by a narrower gold frame defined by black fillets with outermost blue fillet ; textual dividers in the form of illuminated rosettes with red and blue accents ; keywords and headings rubricated ; circles (or hāʼ evoking familiar rhomboid dots) and lines indicating size, proportion and angle for the large sample letters entered in the margins are also rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh (nesih) and thluth (sülüs) ; exquisite specimen of Ottoman calligraphy executed by Kebecizade Mehmet Vasfi Efendi (d. 1831).', 'Layout: Written in 9 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 2 V(20), IV (28), i ; two quinions followed by a quaternion ; catchwords present.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "كتبه اضعف الكتاب محمد الوصفى المعروف بحافظ القرآن من تلاميذ ابو بكر راشد افندى غفر الله لهما"', 'Explicit: "وبرى معكوسه در راجعه داخى ديرلر بونلر كبى""', 'Incipit: "حمد بى عد وثناء لا يعد اول خالق اللوح والقلمه كه كاف ونون ايله جمله كائنات وممكناتى وار ... تراشيدن قلم وشناختن اولا حسن خط يازنلر قلمك اعلاسين ومركبك رعناسين وكاغدك زيباسين كورمك كركدر ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Exquisite copy of a treatise on calligraphy (addressing chiefly nesih and sülüs) attributed to Tacbeyzade [Taçbeyzade, Tacizade, Taczade] Mehmet bin Tacettin [Mehmed b.Taceddin] (d.1587) executed by the calligrapher Kebecizade Mehmet Vasfi Efendi (d. 1831). The text opens with preparing the pen and the origins of the scripts and their names (returning to Ibn al-Bawwāb and Yāqūt al-Mustaʻṣamī with some sayings attributed to them), followed by the müfredat (single and double letters) and the mürekkebat (words and phrases of more than two letters). Sample letters marked with the proper proportions and angles are provided in the margins.'])

en: (count: ['In Maghribī script.', 'No rubrication.', 'Tables for timekeeping for each day of the 12 months of the Gregorian calendar.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 439', 'Origin: Dates in dated pieces range from 1009 [1600 or 1] to 1211 [1796 or 7]. Some pieces possibly earlier. Binding late 19th or early 20th century, likely produced in Yıldız Palace workshop and certainly not earlier than 1882 when the arma was finalized by Sultan Abdülhamit II.', 'Former shelfmark: "211" inscribed in pencil on opening panel.', 'Binding: Heavy boards covered in red leather ; Western style binding ; interior of boards (and facing panels) lined with white, textured paper (satin-like pattern) ; upper and lower covers carry central panel with the Ottoman arms (upper cover) or crescent and star (lower cover) gold-stamped on bright green satin, outlined in gold-tooled stars and bordered in gold-stamped (with dark green leather onlays) cartouches with crescent and star accents ; board edges heavily beveled and gold-tooled ; edges of panels gold-painted ; sewn in heavy pink cord ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion, lifting and losses of onlays, etc.', 'Support: Calligraphic pieces on assorted laid papers, well-burnished ; some decorative papers, tinted or marbled ; each mounted in heavy pasteboards (panels) covered in dark green coated and textured paper with edges gold-painted.', 'Decoration: Varies by piece ; use of gold and colored pigments in frames, decorative borders, textual dividers and accents (mainly rosettes).', 'Script: Naskh (nesih), thuluth (sülüs) and nastaʻlīq (talik), varying by piece ; superb Ottoman and Persian calligraphic hands.', 'Layout: Varies greatly by piece.', 'Collation: 19 heavy panels (pasteboards) attached via red cloth stubs (supported by further board).', 'Title from upper cover.', 'Ms. codex.', '38. fol.19b : [blank].', '37. fol.19a : unsigned piece in nastaliq, undated.', '36. fol.18b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher İsmail Zühtü (İsmail Zühdi d.1806, نمقه الفقير اسمعيل الزهدى) and undated.', '35. fol.18a : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher İbrahim Afif (d.1767) (سوده ابراهيم عفيف) and undated.', '34. fol.17b : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) signed by the calligrapher Şeyhülislam Veliüddin Efendi (d.1768) (العبد الداعى ولى الدين المفتش باوقاف الحرمين) and dated 1142 [1729 or 30].', '33. fol.17a : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Usturacızade Mehmet Şehri (d.1740) (سوده الفقير محمد المعروف بشهرى) and undated.', '32. fol.16b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher İsmail Zühtü (İsmail Zühdi d.1806, كتبه العبد الضعيف اسمعيل الزهدى) and undated.', '31. fol.16a : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated.', '30. fol.15b : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) signed by the calligrapher Şeyhizade Mehmet Şihabuddin (الفقير حرقه شريفه شيخى زاده السيد محمد شهاب الدين) dated 1211 [1796 or 7].', '29. fol.15a : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated.', '28. fol.14b : piece in nastaʻlīq signed “بنده درگاه صفی” and dated 1182 [1768 or 9].', '27. fol.14a : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Hüseyin Hamid (d. after 1787) (كتبه العبد الضعيف السيد حسين الحامد) and dated 1181 [1767 or 8].', '26. fol.13b : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher Sulṭān Ḥusayn (نمقه سلطان حسين) and undated.', '25. fol.13a : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Hafız Yusuf Efendi (d.1787) (كتبها عبد مذنب لا طاعة له يوسف المعروف بحافظ القرآن) and undated.', '24. fol.12b : unsigned piece in nastaʻlīq (talik), undated.', '23. fol.12a : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated.', '22. fol.11b : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated.', '21. fol.11a : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher Mīr ʻImād al-Ḥasanī (d.1615) (الفقير الحقير المذنب عماد الحسنى) and dated 1009 [1600 or 1].', '20. fol.10b : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher Muḥammad ʻAlī (الفقير محمد على) and undated.', '19. fol.10a: piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) signed by the calligrapher Mehmet Refi Efendi (d.1769) (الفقير المذنب محمد رفيع) and undated.', '18. fol.9b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Ebubekir Raşit (d.1782) (سوده اضعف المذنبين ابو بكر راشد) and undated.', '17. fol.9a : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher Shāh Maḥmūd al-Nishāpūrī (fl.1517-1572) (كتبه المذنب شاه محمود النشابورى) and undated, on textile.', '16. fol.8b : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated.', '15. fol.8a : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated.', '14. fol.7b : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated.', '13. fol.7a : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher İsmail Zühtü (İsmail Zühdi d.1806, كتبه اسماعيل الزهدى) and undated.', '12. fol.6b : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) signed by the calligrapher Durmuşzade Ahmet (d.1717) (الفقير المذنب احمد المدعو بطورمش زاده) and dated 1107 [1695 or 6].', '11. fol.6a : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) signed by the calligrapher Durmuşzade Ahmet (d.1717) (الفقير المذنب احمد المدعو بطورمش زاده) and dated 1107 [1695 or 6].', '10. fol.5b : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher Aḥmad al-Ḥusaynī (كتبه العبد احمد الحسينى) and undated.', '9. fol.5a : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Eğrikapılı Mehmet Râsim Efendi (d.1756) (حرره الفقير الى رحمة ربه القدير محمد راسم) and undated.', '8. fol.4b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Eğrikapılı Mehmet Râsim Efendi (d.1756) (نمقه الفقير محمد راسم) and undated.', '7. fol.4a : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Eğrikapılı Mehmet Râsim Efendi (d.1756) (حرره الفقير محمد راسم) and undated.', '6. fol.3b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Eğrikapılı Mehmet Râsim Efendi (d.1756) (نمقه محمد راسم) and undated.', '5. fol.3a : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Eğrikapılı Mehmet Râsim Efendi (d.1756) (حرره محمد راسم) and undated.', '4. fol.2b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Eğrikapılı Mehmet Râsim Efendi (d.1756) (نمقه محمد راسم) and undated.', '3. fol.2a : unsigned piece in nastaliq, undated.', '2. fol.1b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Mehmet Nuri Musa Efendizade (العبد المذنب محمد نورى بحافظ القرآن موسى افندى زاده) dated 1193 [1779 or 80].', '1. fol.1a : [blank].', 'Exquisite album of assorted calligraphic specimens (36 kıt\'alar / pieces), likely assembled and bound for Sultan Abdülhamit II (r.1876-1909). Contents briefly addressed by Muhittin Serin in "Amerika Birleşik Devletleri’ndeki Bazı Kütüphanelerde Bulunan İslam El Yazma Eserleri ve Michigan Üniversitesi II. Abdülhamid Koleksiyonu." Contributions to the cataloguing from Mamoun Sakkal.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 440', 'Origin: Dates in dated pieces range from 1006 [1597 or 8] to 1252 [1843 or 4]. Some pieces possibly earlier. Binding late 19th or early 20th century, likely produced in Yıldız Palace workshop and certainly not earlier than 1882 when the arma was finalized by Sultan Abdülhamit II.', 'Former shelfmark: "208" inscribed in pencil on opening panel.', 'Binding: Heavy boards covered in red leather ; Western style binding ; interior of boards (and facing panels) lined with white, textured paper (satin-like pattern) ; upper and lower covers carry central panel gold-stamped with the Ottoman arms (upper cover) or crescent and star (lower cover) at center, outlined in gold-tooled stars and bordered in gold-stamped (with olive green leather onlays) decorative panels in vegetal designs with crescents gold-stamped on olive green leather onlays at the four corners ; board edges heavily beveled and gold-tooled ; edges of panels gold-painted ; sewn in heavy pink cord ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion, lifting and losses of onlays, etc.', 'Support: Calligraphic pieces on assorted laid papers, well-burnished ; some decorative papers, tinted, marbled or silhouette ; each mounted in heavy pasteboards (panels) covered in dark green coated and textured paper (resembling reptile hide) with edges gold-painted.', 'Decoration: Varies by piece ; use of gold and colored pigments in frames, decorative borders, textual dividers and accents (mainly rosettes).', "Script: Naskh (nesih), thuluth (sülüs), tawqīʻ (tevki'), and nastaʻlīq (talik), varying by piece ; superb Ottoman and Persian calligraphic hands.", 'Layout: Varies greatly by piece.', 'Collation: Twenty-one heavy panels (pasteboards) attached via red cloth stubs (supported by further board).', 'Title from upper cover.', 'Ms. codex.', '42. fol.21b : [blank].', '41. fol.21a : piece in divani signed by the calligrapher Mehmet Recai (كتبه الحاج محمد رجائى رئيس الكتاب سابقا) and dated 1186 [1772 or 3].', '40. fol.20b : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated.', '39. fol.20a : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated (with area left unfilled, perhaps for colophon or icazet text).', '38. fol.19b : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated.', '37. fol.19a : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated.', '36. fol.18b : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated.', '35. fol.18a : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated.', '34. fol.17b : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher Ḥusayn ʻAlī (العبد حسين على كاتب) and undated (set in a border of silhouette paper with floral motifs).', '33. fol.17a : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher Ḥusayn ʻAlī (العبد حسين على كاتب) and undated (set in a border of silhouette paper with animal motifs).', '32. fol.16b : unsigned piece in nastaʻlīq, undated (set in border of silhouette paper with bird motifs).', '31. fol.16a : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher Aḥmad al-Ḥusaynī (كتبه المذنب احمد الحسينى) and undated (set in border of silhouette paper with bird motifs).', '30. fol.15b : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated.', '29. fol.15a : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) signed by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) (الفقير محمد اسعد اليسارى) and undated.', '28. fol.14b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Hafız Ahmet (مشقه المذنب الخاظئ السيد حافظ احمد المعروف بتوفيقى) and dated 1196 [1781 or 2].', '27. fol.14a : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher “جزائري” and dated 1107 [1692 or 3].', '26. fol.13b : unsigned piece in naskh, undated.', '25. fol.13a : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh (opening of müfredat exercises), undated.', '24. fol.12b : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) signed by the calligrapher Mehmet Kasim (محمد قاسم) and undated.', '23. fol.12a : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Mehmet Şevki Efendi (d.1887) (كتبه العبد الضعيف السيد محمد شوقى) and undated.', '22. fol.11b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher İmamzade [possibly Eğrikapılı Mehmet Râsim Efendi (d.1756) who early in his career signed İmamzade] (كتبه امام زاده) and undated.', '21. fol.11a : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated (likely accompanying piece on fol.11b).', '20. fol.10b : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated.', '19. fol.10a : unsigned piece in nastaʻlīq, undated (set in border of silhouette paper with floral motifs).', '18. fol.9b : unsigned piece in nastaʻlīq, undated (set in border of silhouette paper with floral motifs).', '17. fol.9a : unsigned piece in nastaʻlīq, undated (set in border of silhouette paper with dragon motifs).', '16. fol.8b : piece in thuluth and naskh approaching tawqīʻ signed by the calligrapher Hafız Osman Efendi (d.1698) (مشقه الفقير عثمان المشتهر بحافظ القرآن) and dated 1098 [1686 or 7].', '15. fol.8a : unsigned piece in naskh, undated.', '14. fol.7b : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher Muhammad (محمد) and undated.', '13. fol.7a : piece in thuluth and signed by the calligrapher Afif (كتبه عفيف) [possibly İbrahim Afif, d.1767] and undated.', '12. fol.6b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Salıh Namık [?] (سوده صالح نامق) and undated.', '11. fol.6a : piece in thuluth and naskh with icazetname signed by the calligrapher Şekerzade Mehmet Efendi (d.1753) authorizing the student who executed the piece (اجزت لصاحب هذه القطعة الشريفة وضع الكتبة فما كتبه وانا الفقير السيد محمد المعروف بشكر زاده) and dated 1155 [1742 or 3].', '10. fol.5b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Hafız Ahmet (حرره السيد حافظ احمد) and dated 1197 [1782 or 3].', '9. fol.5a : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated.', '8. fol.4b : unsigned frontispiece with excerpt (اول از بالای کرسی بر زمین آمد سخن او دگر ...) in thuluth at center of shamsah, undated.', '7. fol.4a : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated.', '6. fol.3b : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) signed by the calligrapher Ahmet Çelebi (احمد چلبی) dated 1006 [1597 or 8].', '5. fol.3a : unsigned composite piece in nastaʻlīq of different sizes, undated.', '4. fol.2b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Mahmut Celalettin (Mahmud Celaleddin Efendi d.1829, نمقه الفقير محمود المعروف بجلال الدين) and undated.', '3. fol.2a : piece in naskh and thuluth signed by the calligrapher Mehmet Şefik Bey (d.1879) (كتبه محمد شفيق عن خلفا الحاج مصطفى عزت) and signed 1259 [1843 or 4], executed in imitation of a piece by Kazasker (Kadıasker) Mustafa İzzet Efendi.', '2. fol.1b : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) signed by the calligrapher Mehmet Zeynelâbidin Haşimi (حرره المذنب محمد زين العابدين الهاشمى) and undated.', '1. fol.1a : [blank].', 'Exquisite album of assorted calligraphic specimens (40 kıt\'alar / pieces), likely assembled and bound for Sultan Abdülhamit II (r.1876-1909). Contents briefly addressed by Muhittin Serin in "Amerika Birleşik Devletleri’ndeki Bazı Kütüphanelerde Bulunan İslam El Yazma Eserleri ve Michigan Üniversitesi II. Abdülhamid Koleksiyonu." Contributions to the cataloguing from Marion Frenger, Mamoun Sakkal, and Irvin Schick.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 438', 'Origin: Dated pieces range from 914 [1508 or 9] to 1317 [1899 or 1900]. Binding late 19th or early 20th century, likely produced in Yıldız Palace workshop and certainly not earlier than 1882 when the arma was finalized by Sultan Abdülhamit II.', 'Former shelfmark: "210" inscribed in pencil on opening panel.', 'Binding: Heavy boards covered in red leather ; Western style binding ; interior of boards (and facing panels) lined with white, textured paper (satin-like pattern) ; upper and lower covers carry central panel with the Ottoman arms (upper cover) or crescent and star (lower cover) gold-stamped on bright green satin, outlined in gold-tooled stars and bordered in gold-stamped (with light green-gold onlays) decorative panels in vegetal designs with crescents gold-stamped on mint-green silk onlays at the four corners ; board edges heavily beveled and gold-tooled ; edges of panels gold-painted ; sewn in heavy pink cord ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion, lifting and losses of silk onlays, etc.', 'Support: Calligraphic pieces on assorted laid papers, well-burnished ; some decorative papers, tinted or marbled ; each mounted in heavy pasteboards (panels) covered in dark green coated and textured paper with edges gold-painted.', 'Decoration: Varies by piece ; use of gold and colored pigments in frames, decorative borders, textual dividers and accents (mainly rosettes) ; two miniatures, one in Indian style, the other Persian, each featuring a pair of lovers.', 'Script: Naskh (nesih), thuluth (sülüs) and nastaʻlīq (talik), varying by piece ; superb Ottoman and Persian calligraphic hands.', 'Layout: Varies greatly by piece.', 'Collation: Twenty-two heavy panels (pasteboards) attached via red cloth stubs (supported by further board).', 'Title from upper cover.', 'Ms. codex.', '44. fol.22b : [blank].', '43. fol.22a : unsigned piece in nastaʻlīq executed in filigree / cut-work, undated (compare Calligraphie islamique: Textes sacrés et profanes, no.140).', '42. fol.21b : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) signed by the calligrapher Dedezade (مشقه الفقير الحقير دده زاده) and undated.', '41. fol.21a : piece in naskh with icazetname for a student of es-Seyyid Mustafa Efendi (من تلاميذ السيد مصطفى افندى) authorizing the student to sign his name to his work and to teach others, undated.', '40. fol.20b : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher Asad Allāh Shīrāzī (العبد المذنب اسد الله شيرازى) and dated 1254 [1838 or 9].', '39. fol.20a : piece in celi sülüs signed by the calligrapher Mahmut Celalettin (Mahmud Celaleddin Efendi, d.1829, حرره محمود جلال الدين) and undated.', '38. fol.19b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Mustafa b. Osman Keskin (fl.1758) (الفقير مصطفى بن عثمان المعروف بكسكين) and dated 1172 [1758 or 9].', '37. fol.19a : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher Mīr ʻImād al-Ḥasanī (d.1615) (مشقه عماد الحسنى) and undated (compare Calligraphy and the decorative arts of Islam, no.7).', '36. fol.18b : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher Faqīr ʻAlī (فقير على) and undated (compare Calligraphy and the decorative arts of Islam, no.8).', '35. fol.18a : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Ahmet b. Ali Kütâhî (سوده احمد بن على المعروف بالكوتاهى) dated 1100 [1688 or 9].', '34. fol.17b : piece in naskh signed by the calligrapher Hocazade Ahmet (كتبه الفقير الى رحمة القدير السيد احمد المعروف بخواجه زاده) and dated 1161 [1748].', '33. fol.17a : piece in naskh signed by the calligrapher Derviş Ali [possibly İkinci Derviş Ali, d.1716] (الحقير درويش على) and undated.', '32. fol.16b : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher Muḥammad Muhtadī (الحقر المذنب محمد مهتدى) and undated.', '31. fol.16a : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated.', '30. fol.15b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher al-Sayyid ʻAbd Allāh (likely Yedikuleli Seyyid Abdullah, d.1731, "كتبه السيد عبد الله") and undated.', '29. fol.15a : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher İsmail (اسمعيل, possibly Ağakapılı İsmail Efendi, d.1706) and undated.', '28. fol.14b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher İsmail (اسمعيل, possibly Ağakapılı İsmail Efendi, d.1706) and undated.', '27. fol.14a : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher Muʻizz al-Dīn Muḥammad al-Ḥusaynī (كتبه معز الدين محمد الحسينى) and dated 986 [1578 or 9].', '26. fol.13b : piece in thluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Hocazade Mehmet (d.1695) (كتبت له اذنا وانا الفقير محمد خواجه زاده) and dated 1162 [1749].', '25. fol.13a : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Şekerzâde Mehmet Efendi (d.1753) (كتبه السيد محمد المعروف بشكر زاده) and dated 1144 [1731 or 2].', '24. fol.12b : unsigned piece in nastaʻlīq, undated.', '23. fol.12a : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher ʻAbd al-Bāqī (Abdülbâki / الفقير المذنب عبد الباقى) and undated.', '22. fol.11b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Yedikuleli Seyyid Abdullah (d.1731) (كتبه العبد الفقير السيد عبد الله المعروف بالامام) and dated 1114 [1702 or 3].', '21. fol.11a : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher Aḥmad Rashīd (الفقير احمد رشيد) and dated 1194 [1780].', '20. fol.10b : unsigned piece in naskh, undated.', '19. fol.10a : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher Muḥammad Amīn al-Ḥusaynī al-Tirmidhī (مشقه المذنب محمد امين الحسينى الترمذى) dated 1010 [1601 or 2].', '18. fol.9b: piece in thluth signed by the calligrapher Hulusi (پر تقصير خلوصى) and dated 1128 [1715 or 16].', '17. fol.9a : piece in thuluth signed by the calligrapher Hulusi (الفقير خلوصى) and dated 1128 [1715 or 16].', '16. fol.8b : piece in naskh appearing to be the opening of the piece on fol.8a.', '15. fol.8a : piece in naskh (appearing to be the continuation of the piece on fol.8b) signed by the calligrapher Yedikuleli Seyyid Abdullah (d.1731) (كتبه العبد الفقير السيد عبد الله المعروف بالامام) and dated 1120 [1708 or 9 ].', '14. fol.7b : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher Maḥmūd Isḥāq Shihābī (مشقه محمود اسحق شهابى) and undated.', '13. fol.7a : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher ʻAbd al-Jabbār (الفقير الحقير المذنب الراجي عبد الجبار غفر له) and undated.', '12. fol.6b : unsigned piece in nastaʻlīq, undated.', '11. fol.6a : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Kazasker (Kadıasker) Mustafa İzzet Efendi (d.1876) (حرره السيد الحاج مصطفى عزت المعروف برئيس العلماء) and dated 1288 [1871 or 2].', '10. fol.5b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Hulusi (الفقير خلوصى) and undated.', '9. fol.5a : piece with text in nastaʻlīq (possibly signed ʻAbd al-Raḥmān) surrounding oval with unfinished drawing.', '8. fol.4b : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher Mīr ʻAlī ("مشقه المذنب مير على") and undated.', '7. fol.4a : painting of two lovers, likely Safavid.', '6. fol.3b : painting of two lovers, in Mughal style.', '5. fol.3a : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher Badīʻ al-Zamān Quṭbʹshāhī (بديع الزمان قطبشاهى) and undated.', '4. fol.2b : unsigned piece in nastaʻlīq.', '3. fol.2a : piece in nastaʻlīq signed by the calligrapher Sulṭān Muḥammad Khandān (سلطان محمد خندان) and dated 914 [1508 or 9].', '2. fol.1b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Mehmet Hilmi (محمد حلمى) and dated 1283 [1866 or 7] with illuminations signed by the illuminator Osman Yümni Efendi (d.1919) (عثمان يمنى) and dated 1317 [1899 or 1900].', '1. fol.1a : [blank].', 'Exquisite album of assorted calligraphic specimens (42 kıt\'alar / pieces), many signed, likely assembled and bound for Sultan Abdülhamit II (r.1876-1909). Contents briefly addressed by Muhittin Serin in "Amerika Birleşik Devletleri’ndeki Bazı Kütüphanelerde Bulunan İslam El Yazma Eserleri ve Michigan Üniversitesi II. Abdülhamid Koleksiyonu." Contributions to the cataloguing from Mamoun Sakkal.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 441', 'Origin: Origin: Dates in dated pieces range from 1080 [1669 or 70] to 1323 [1905 or 6]. Some pieces possibly earlier. Binding late 19th or early 20th century, likely produced in Yıldız Palace workshop and certainly not earlier than 1882 when the arma was finalized by Sultan Abdülhamit II.', 'Former shelfmark: "208" inscribed in pencil on opening panel.', 'Binding: Heavy boards covered in red leather ; Western style binding ; interior of boards (and facing panels) lined with white, textured paper (satin-like pattern) ; upper and lower covers carry central panel gold-stamped with the Ottoman arms (upper cover) or crescent and star (lower cover) at center, outlined in gold-tooled stars and bordered in gold-stamped (with olive green leather onlays) decorative panels in vegetal designs with crescents gold-stamped on olive green leather onlays at the four corners ; board edges heavily beveled and gold-tooled ; edges of panels gold-painted ; sewn in heavy pink cord ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion, lifting and losses of onlays, etc.', 'Support: Calligraphic pieces on assorted laid papers, well-burnished ; some decorative papers, tinted, marbled or silhouette ; each mounted in heavy pasteboards (panels) covered in dark green coated and textured paper (resembling reptile hide) with edges gold-painted.', 'Decoration: Varies by piece ; use of gold and colored pigments in frames, decorative borders, textual dividers and accents (mainly rosettes).', 'Script: Muḥaqqaq (muhakkak), naskh (nesih), thuluth (sülüs) and nastaʻlīq (talik), varying by piece ; superb Ottoman and Persian calligraphic hands.', 'Layout: Varies greatly by piece.', 'Collation: Twenty-one heavy panels (pasteboards) attached via red cloth stubs (supported by further board).', 'Title from upper cover.', 'Ms. codex.', '42. fol.21b : [blank].', '41. fol.21a : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Mehmet Hilmi (نمقه السيد محمد حلمى) and dated 1287 [1870 or 1].', '40. fol.20b : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding pieces (from fol.10a).', '39. fol.20a : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding and following pieces.', '38. fol.19b : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding and following pieces.', '37. fol.19a : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding and following pieces.', '36. fol.18b : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding and following pieces.', '35. fol.18a : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding and following pieces.', '34. fol.17b : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding and following pieces.', '33. fol.17a : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding and following pieces.', '32. fol.16b : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding and following pieces.', '31. fol.16a : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding and following pieces.', '30. fol.15b : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding and following pieces.', '29. fol.15a : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding and following pieces.', '28. fol.14b : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding and following pieces.', '27. fol.14a : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding and following pieces.', '26. fol.13b : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding and following pieces.', '25. fol.13a : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding and following pieces.', '24. fol.12b : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding and following pieces.', '23. fol.12a : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding and following pieces.', '22. fol.11b : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding and following pieces.', '21. fol.11a : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding and following pieces.', '20. fol.10b : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) likely by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) and belonging to the preceding and following pieces.', '19. fol.10a : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) signed by the calligrapher Yesari Mehmet Esad Efendi (d.1798) (الفقير محمد اسعد اليسارى) and undated, likely (with the following pieces fol.10b-20b) concluding piece of a meşk murakkaa.', '18. fol.9b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Hocazade Mehmet (d.1695) (سوده الحقير محمد الشهر بخواجه زاده) and dated 1080 [1669 or 70].', '17. fol.9a : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Kazasker (Kadıasker) Mustafa İzzet Efendi (d.1876) (بندۀ ال عبا سيد عزت مصطفى) and possibly dated 1278 [1861 or 2].', '16. fol.8b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Hasan Rıza Efendi (d.1920) (حرره الحاج السيد حسن رضا ) and dated 1323 [1905 or 6].', '15. fol.8a : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher İsmail b. Abdullah student of İbrahim Rodosi (d.1787) (مشقه العبد المذنب اسمعيل بن عبد الله من تلاميذ ابراهيم الردوسى) and undated.', '14. fol.7b : piece in thluth signed by the calligrapher Usturacızade Mehmet Şehri (d.1740) (سوده محمد الشهرى) and undated.', '13. fol.7a : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Hasan Rıza Efendi (d.1920) (حرره الحاج السيد حسن رضا ) and dated 1323 [1905 or 6].', '12. fol.6b : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated.', '11. fol.6a : piece in naskh signed by the calligrapher Deli Osman Afif Dâmâdı (d.1805) (كتبه الفقير السيد عثمان المعروف بداماد العفيف) and dated 1205 [1790 or 1].', '10. fol.5b : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher İsmail Zühtü (İsmail Zühdi d.1806, كتبه اسمعيل الزهدى) and undated.', '9. fol.5a : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Tevfiki [?] (كتبه توفيقى) and undated.', '8. fol.4b : piece in nastaʻlīq (talik) signed by the calligrapher, most likely the Ottoman Sultan Murat IV (r.1623-1640) (كتبه مراد خان), and undated.', '7. fol.4a : piece in thuluth and naskh signed by the calligrapher Hafız Yusuf Efendi (d.1787) (نمقه المذنب يوسف المعروف بحافظ القرآن) and unsigned.', '6. fol.3b : unsigned piece in thuluth and naskh, undated.', '5. fol.3a : piece in naskh signed by the calligrapher Eğrikapılı Mehmet Râsim Efendi (d.1756) (محمد راسم) and undated.', '4. fol.2b : unsigned piece in muḥaqqaq (continuation of the previous), undated.', '3. fol.2a : unsigned piece in muḥaqqaq, undated.', '2. fol.1b : impression of the seal (مهر) of Muḥammad Shāh Qājār (محمد شاه قاجار, r.1834-1848) with inscription “الملک لله محمد شاه غازی صاحب تاج و نگین آمد شکوه ملک و ملت رونق آیین دین آمد” and date 1250 [1834 or 5] set in illuminated four-lobed ornament.', '1. fol.1a : [blank].', 'Exquisite album of assorted calligraphic specimens (40 kıt\'alar / pieces), likely assembled and bound for Sultan Abdülhamit II (r.1876-1909). Contents briefly addressed by Muhittin Serin in "Amerika Birleşik Devletleri’ndeki Bazı Kütüphanelerde Bulunan İslam El Yazma Eserleri ve Michigan Üniversitesi II. Abdülhamid Koleksiyonu." Contributions to the cataloguing from Mamoun Sakkal.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 627', 'Origin: Appears to lack dated scribal colophon ; authorial colophon at close (not in main hand) provides a date of completion for the composition of this commentary, 973 [1565 or 6], and this copy may have been produced not long after. Paper, hand, etc. do suggest 16th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and fore edge flap label, "IL 28" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in quite dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in marbled paper (pink, yellow, grey) ; upper and lower covers carry scalloped blind-stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition of vertical and horizontal symmetry, compare Déroche class. OSd) as well as tooled border ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and yellow, fair condition but with losses to both head and tail ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting of leather, fore edge flap ill-fitting, negative draw in upper cover, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of at least two types ; mainly with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 30 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of anchor (two lines) in circle with star above (see p.212, 213, 270, 271, etc.), thin though sturdy, medium cream in color, well-burnished to glossy ; another type with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), and another larger watermark of anchor (single line) in circle (see p.18, 208, etc.).', 'Decoration: Keywords, abbreviation symbols, and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; compact but bold Turkish hand ; virtually serifless with effect of tilt to the right, elongation and thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 13-15 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: V+1 (11), 12 V(131), IV-2 (137) ; chiefly quinions ; quire numbering in the form of whole words, rubricated, in the upper outer corner of the opening recto of each quire ; lacks proper catchwords but last word of final line on the verso of each leaf is usually repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Authorial," Turkish, reads "بو علمى نحو واضح داخى روشن اهلى اچره چون اتدي بو شرحم ... تمام اولدى بياضه چقدى بويل ديدم تاريخنى بتدى بو شرحم ٩٧٣"', 'Explicit: "فاضبط هذه الضوابط الشريفة واحسن انها واحفظ هذه القواعد الطيفة ولاتنها ربنا لا تؤاخذنا نسينا او اخطأنا سبحان ربك رب العزة عما يصفون وسلام على المرسلين والحمد لله رب العالمين تم الكتاب بعون الله"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي علمنا لسان العرب والشكر لله الذي اعطانا الفهم والطلب ... اما بعد فهذا مختصر في شرح ديباجة الافصاح اخذته من كتب المعتبرة وسميته بالايضاح"', 'Title from opening on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', "Clear and well-annoted copy of an anonymous commentary on the preface (dībājah) of al-Ifṣāḥ, a grammatical work providing iʻrāb for the Fātiḥah and for the Kāfiyah of Ibn al-Ḥājib, by Ali Kuşçu (ʻAlāʼ al-Dīn ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad al-Qūshjī, d.1474). Text of the preface of al-Ifṣāḥ has been entered on the 'title page' (p.1) by a former owner."])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Three crescents; Andrea Galvani of Pordenone; initials FA in orman; three face-in-the-moons. For the first two see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), pp. 24 and 36 and no. 860.', 'Contains tables and sundial diagrams.', 'Text and tables rubricated; marginal notes and corrections in hand of copyist and others (?); kurrāsahs numbered; foliation added in European arabic numerals in pencil.', 'Date in colophon: qāla muʼallifuhu kāna al-farāgh min taʼlīf hādhā al-kitāb fī shahr Rajab min shuhūr sanat 1128 thamāniyah wa-ʻishrīn wa-miʼah wa-alf [June-July 1716] wa-kānat muddat taḥṣīl mā qaṣadtuhu fī hādhā al-kitāb ʻashar sanawāt wa-kusūr....', 'An extensive treatise on the theory and making of sundials; perhaps in the hand of its author?'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 57', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon. Paper would suggest late 16th or early 17th century.', "Accompanying materials: A few scraps of paper carrying glosses, etc. (paginated pp.139-140, pp.235-236, pp.265-266) ; very small scrap between pp.268-269 carries former owner's mark and seal impression.", 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 12. Al-Islah, with commentary."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper, hinges in marbled paper (red, orange, blue, etc.) ; upper and lower covers bear blind-stamped scalloped mandorla with vegetal composition (compare Déroche class. OSd 8), along with frame in series of s-shaped stamps flanked by blind-tooled fillets ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; chevron endbands in black and red, fair condition ; in quite poor condition with much abrasion, moisture damage, cracking and lifting of leather, losses to fore-edge flap, delamination of boards, envelop flap detaching from fore-edge flap, etc. ; repairs in various leathers and paper.', 'Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced roughly 32 mm. apart ; anchor in circle watermark (compare Heawood 7).', 'Decoration: Section headings rubricated ; text being commented upon overlined in red ; written area surrounded by red rule-border (opening through p.197).', 'Script: Naskh with influence of nastaʻlīq ; at least two Turkish (possibly Persian) hands ; initial hand sans serif with effect of tilt to the right and of words descending to baseline, often exaggerated contrast in thickness of horizontal and vertical strokes ; second hand (from p.183 to close) similar though line is certainly thinner ; kāf mashkūlah preferred with bar (shaqq) appearing on even final kāf ; mainly closed counters ; ligature for kāf followed by alif, with alif curving up to meet the bar of the kāf (shaqq) forming a closed loop.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V-1 (9), 16 V(169), IV (177), 8 V(257), IV (265), 3 V(295), V-1 (304) ; chiefly quinions ; no catchwords present, but last word of final line on the verso of each leaf repeated at first of initial line on following recto ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (begins with ۱ on incipit page, p.4) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during digitization, includes flyleaves and inserts, mistakenly repeats two pages (skips from p.243 to p.242 and continues), mistakenly skips two pages between pp.447-448).', 'Explicit: "وانما قال في الاختيار لانه يحل اكل الميتة في الاضطرار والله اعلم بالصواب واله المرجع والمآب تم"', 'Incipit: "احمده على الهداية والوقاية في البداية والنهاية واشكره على ما انعم علي من التوفيق والعناية ... اما بعد فغير خاف على ذوي البصائر اي المختصر الموسوم بالوقاية ... وسميت المتن بالاصلاح تضمنه اصلاح ما في الوقاية من الذلل والشرح بالايضاح لاشتماله على ايضاح ما في الشرح المذكور من الخلل ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Clear copy of the author's own commentary on his Iṣlāḥ al-Wiqāyah, corrections to the commentary by Ṣadr al-Sharīʻah al-Aṣghar ʻUbayd Allāh ibn Masʻūd al-Maḥbūbī on the work of his grandfather Burhān al-Sharīʻah Maḥmūd ibn Ṣadr al-Sharīʻah al-Awwal, Wiqāyat al-riwāyah. Preceded by table of contents."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 142', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.714, copied mainly by Muṣṭafá ibn Muḥammad al-Uskūbī. Transcription finished Rabīʻ II 1028 [March-April 1619].', 'Accompanying materials: Folded document (paginated pp.411-412).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 102. Al-Inkah." ; "٥٦١" on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in laid paper with spine, fore-edge flap and edges/turn-ins in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; sewn in cream and dark blue thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in light blue and red, only partially intact ; overall in poor condition with much abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, staining, etc. ; repairs in dark brown leather.', 'Support: European laid paper with anchor in circle watermark (leaf above).', 'Decoration: Overlining in red and black.', 'Script: Naskh with influence of nastaʻlīq ; perhaps more than one hand ; virtually serifless ; mainly closed counters ; effect of words descending to baseline, occasionally more exaggerated ; occasional effect of tilt to the right ; freely ligatured ; final nūn often reversed (re-curved).', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V (10), VI (22), 33 V(352), III+1 (359) ; chiefly quinions ; final four leaves originally left blank ; leaf carrying pp.265-266 partially blank due to repair ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf and insert).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم الكتاب في يوم الجمعة في شهر ربيع الآخر لسنة ثمان وعشرين والف من هجرة النبوية عليه افضل التحية حرره الفقير مصطفى ابن محمد الاسكوبي الخطيب بجامع الحاج حرم [؟]"', 'Explicit: [al-Inqāḥ] "ربنا لا تؤخذنا ان نسينا او اخطأنا سبحان ربك رب العزة عما يصفون وسلام على المرسلين والحمد لله رب العالمين تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب" [al-Ifṣāḥ] "قوله الفا والجملة الفعلية خبر المبتدأ والاسمية استئناف ومن حسن خاتمة الكتاب ختمه بالالف كافتتاحه به وقد تم ما في هذا الشرح من الكلام بتوفيق الله الكريم العلام والحمد لله على التمام ...ربنا انك رؤوف رحيم تمت بعون الملك الوهاب الخط يبقى زمانا في الكتاب وصاحب الخط رميم في التراب"', 'Incipit: [al-Inqāḥ] "الحمد لله خالق العباد والصلوة على محمد صاحب الارشاد ...اما بعد فهذا مختصر موسوم بالانقاح في شرح ديباجة الافصاح ملخص من قواعد عجائب الايضاح ..." ; [al-Ifṣāḥ] "الحمد لله الذي رفع السموات بغير عماد وخفض الارض ونصب الجبال بجزم القضاء للعباد والصلوة والسلام على نبيه الذي سن الوقف ... وفتح البلاد والثناء الخليفة اعنى السلطان مرآد ... وبعد فهذا مختصر في اعراب سورة الفاتحة وكتاب الكافية وذكر شيء من المعاني جمعته من كتب التفاسير والاحاديث والقرأات والصرف والنحو واللغات والكلام والآداب والاصول والمعاني باستعانة المستعان اللطيف وادرجت فيه ما لاح لقلبي الكثيف وسميته بالافصاح ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from openings on p.4 and pp.68-69.', 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.715-p.722 : [blank].', '3. p.68-p.714 : al-Ifṣāḥ / Ali Kuşçu.', '2. p.67 : [blank].', '1. p.4-p.66 : al-Inqāḥ fī sharḥ dībājat al-Ifṣāḥ.', 'Fine copy of al-Ifṣāḥ, a grammatical work providing iʻrāb for the Fātiḥah and for the Kāfiyah of Ibn al-Ḥājib, by Ali Kuşçu (ʻAlāʼ al-Dīn ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad al-Qūshjī, d.1474). Preceded by al-Inqāḥ, an anonymous commentary on the preface of al-Ifṣāḥ.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Crown with grapes.', 'Text rubricated; marginal corrections in hand of copyist.', 'Date in colophon: qad intahá mā utīḥa jamʻuhu fī ghurrat al-awwal min al-akhīr min al-thānī ʻashar min al-hijrah al-nabawīyah [25 September 1786?].', '"A treatise on number theory." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 114.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 108', 'Origin: As appears in authorial colophon on p.28, granted by İsmail Ahmet Ahıskavî (Ismāʻīl ibn Aḥmad Akhisqawī) in 11 Jumādá I 1262 [ca. 7 May 1846] with transcription likely completed just before this date. Copyist supplying the main text of the ijāzah is unnamed.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 143. Ijazat al-alam."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black pressed, textured paper with red leather over spine and edges/turn-ins ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in yellow-tinted European laid paper ; sewn in yellow thread, four stations, with primaries in red ; overall in good condition with only minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support: European wove paper ; well-burnished ; tinted light-green,', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece at opening on p.6 consisting of an arrangement of plumes (in red, blue, purple, white, etc.) and flowers (in pink and white with green leaves) on a field of gold ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of a heavy gold band outlined by black and red fillets ; textual dividers in the form of illuminated rosettes with red and blue accents ; keywords rubricated.', "Script: Naskh ; fine, well-executed Ottoman hand ; seriffed with mainly right-sloping headserifs on most ascenders ; effect of tilt to the left ; mainly open counters ; rounded, mainly curvilinear descenders ; rightward descenders tapered ; 'authorial colophon' in different hand, namely that of the scholar granting the ijāzah.", 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, VII (14), i ; a single septernion ; opening leaf and final leaf blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," rectangular, reads: "كتبه الفقير الحقير المملوء بالذنب اسماعيل بن احمد اخسقه وى غفر الله له ولوالديه وللمؤمنين والمؤمنات كافة في ١١ حا سنة ١٢٦٢"', 'Incipit: "نحمدك اللهم يا من قد احاط بكل شيء علما ونصب من مضوعاته على كمال قدرته علما ... وبعد فان من المعقول عند كل عاقل بل من المشهور في نظر كل غافل ان اجزاء العالم منحصرة في جواهر واعراض ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of an ijāzah (icazetname) granted to Mustafa Hulusi Efendi (Muṣṭafá Khulūṣī Afandī, see pp.11-12) by İsmail Ahmet Ahıskavî, whose name and seal appear in his autograph at the close of the text.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 271', 'Origin: Versified chronogram at end (fol.182b, "اخلاق محسنى") gives dating for completion of composition; this reading, without the preposition "ز", yields the more widely accepted date of 900 H. As appears in colophon on fol.182b, copied by Maḥmūd ibn Najīb. Transcription finished ("tamma al-kitāb bi-ʻawn al-Malik al-Wahhāb taḥrīran fī tārīkh...") 12 Rabīʻ I 922 [ca. 15 April 1516].', 'Binding: Pasteboard covered in red-brown leather; Type II binding (with flap); upper and lower covers bear gold-stamped central mandorla (Déroche class. NSh1) with pendants and simple gold rule-border; smaller mandorla on envelope flap; doublures in light-blue coated paper embossed with vegetal pattern; in good condition.', 'Support: Persian laid paper; laid lines oriented vertically but too faint to count; chain lines not visible; flyleaves are fashioned from a light-blue coated paper, embossed with a vegetal pattern, that is also used for the doublures.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece on fol.2b; marvelously rendered in two rectangular panels; lower panel contains the basmalah, executed in red nastaʻlīq, in a central cartouche flanked by two, smaller palmette-like lozenges; lower panel is framed by an elaborite golden braid; background is predominantly lapis-lazuli, with vegetal/floral patterns executed in gold, red, pink, green, black, and white; upper panel continues the background motif and color palette; three small, predominantly black, palmette-like lozenges serve as the pivot for the repeating vegetal pattern in this panel, but these are subdued figures and are rather absorbed into the lapis-lazuli background and intriquate vine patterns; upper panel is surmounted by five verticle, decorative stalks; written area framed by a rule-border in dark blue, black, and gold; gold frames set off verses and some chapter titles; text is polychrome, with main text in black, Arabic quotations in dark blue, gold, and occasionally red, and chapter titles in dark blue or gold; the words "شعر" and "بيت" as they occur throughout the text introducing verses of poetry are rendered in red and blue, and occasionally, gold; main text of incipit page decorated with gilt cloudbands.', "Script: Main text in nastaʻlīq; chapter headings in tawqīʻ; Arabic quotations of Qur'anic verses and Hadith in naskh and vocalized; basmalah in cartouche of illuminated headpiece in nastaʻlīq.", 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page.', 'Collation: ii, 23 IV (184), i; quaternions; cacthwords present; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, referenced in cataloguing; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, begins with ١ on fol.3a (Western pagination) and concludes with ١۸۰ on fol.182a; fihrist of chapter titles (fol.6a-7a) corresponds with foliation.', 'Dedication: Composed for Shāh Abū al-Muḥsin (شاه ابو المحسن ), one of the sons of the Tīmūrid pādishāh Ḥusayn Bāyqarā, on the occasion of his coming to court (in Herat) from Marv (see fol.4a-4b, Western pagination).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, in Arabic, reads: "رب اختم بالخير والحسنى تمت [كذا] الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب تحريرا في تاريخ اثنى عشر شهر ربيع الاول سنه اثنى عشرين و تسعمايه بخط العبد الحبيب [المجيب ؟] محمود بن نجيب"', 'Explicit: "با خامه گفتم ای كه زهر ساختى قدم وز مقدم تو چشم سخن يافت روشنى اخلاق محسنى بتامى نوشته تاريخ هم نويس ز اخلاق محسنى"', 'Incipit: "حضرت يادشاه على الاطلاق غرت كلمته و جلت عظمته منشور دولت سلطان المرسلين"', 'Title from opening on fol.5a.', 'Ms. codex.', 'A work on ethics in 40 chapters, composed by Kāshifī for Shāh Abū al-Muḥsin, a son of Sulṭān Ḥusayn Bāyqarā. Description provided by Derek Mancini-Lander.'])

en: (count: ['In Maghribī script.', 'Tables rubricated in red and green.', 'Date in heading for tables on pp. [1-3]: ... rasama fī Rajab sanat 1167 [April-May 1754].', 'Astronomical tables made in the year 1754 for latitude 36,40⁰ (Tunis); includes tables for timekeeping on each day of the 12 months of the Gregorian calendar and a table of latitudes and longitudes for cities in North Africa, Spain, Italy, Turkey, Egypt, and Arabia.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 670', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.753, copied by ʻImād ibn Muḥamad ʻImād. Date of transcription not specified. Paper, decoration, etc. suggests 16th or early 17th century. Ownership statement provides a terminus ante quem of 1629.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From upper board lining and spine label, "IL 9" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, now fully detached) ; currently two piece binding (overlapping flanges visible at spine, may represent repair / reback) ; board linings in peach laid paper, hinges in yellow paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped (and once gold-painted) scalloped mandorla filled with vegetal composition (compare Déroche class. OAi 7) set off by gold-painted strokes, tooled rosettes and chain border ; design continues on flap ; sewn in golden yellow thread, two stations, sewing failing ; worked endbands in golden yellow and metallic threads, only primaries and core with a few threads of headband remain, primaries sewn through textile spine lining ; overall in somewhat poor condition with flap fully detached from lower cover, cover almost fully detached from text block at spine except for intact primaries at headband, extensive abrasion, some lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; extensive repairs (also damaged) in brown leather including edging (which has been tooled in a series of s-shaped stamps) on upper and lower covers as well as head and tail of fore edge flap and likely reback ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat indistinct, fairly straight) and chain lines (possibly grouped in pairs) occasionally visible, cloudy formation, thin and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished, dark cream to beige in color ; back flyleaf in European laid paper with anchor in circle watermark.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.30 consisting of rectangular piece with almond-shaped gold cartouche carrying title and flanking pieces all evoking bookcover design, set in field of dark blue with delicate vegital motifs in gold, green, red, white, light blue and yellow, bordered in band of dark blue with white crosses and dots flanked by two narrow gold bands ; written area and ruled margins surrounded by gold frame with outermost blue rule, narrower gold band defines central written area and triangular accents on margins within (occasionally filled with floral motifs) ; keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of three dots in red', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; small compact Persianate hand in a medium line ; characteristically serifless with slight effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots', 'Layout: Written in 51 lines per page, 17 lines in central written area and 34 lines of gloss on the diagonal in the ruled margins ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV-2 (6), 21 IV (174), IV+1 (183), III (189), III+1 (196), 2 III (202), 5 IV (248), III + 1 (255), 14 IV (372), III-1 (376), i ; leaves between opening contents listing and opening of text originally left blank (pp.21-29) ; middle of the quire marks in the form of ه (numeral khamsah or letter hāʼ) in black ink in the upper outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals from pp.353-377 and in black ink from pp.379-753, beginning with Arabic numeral 38 ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," mainly Arabic, reads "تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب والحمد لله اولا واخرا وظاهرا وباطنا وصلى الله على محمد واله الطيبين وعترته الطاهرين اجمعين وسلم تسليما كثيرا كثيرا على يد الفقير الحقير تراب اقدام الفضلا عماد بن محمد عماد ... گر بهم برزده بینی خط من عیب مکن که مرا محنت ایام بهم برزده است"', 'Incipit: [matn] "بسم الله الرحمن الرحیم رب سهل و تمم بالخیر الحمد لمن وفقنا امداد حمد بی عد و اعداد سپاس بی قیاس مبدعی را که آثار ابداع او بر هر ورقی از اوراق و شجری از اشجار سمت ..." ; [ḥashiyah] "و به نستعين حمد و سپاس عتاری را جل جلاله و عم نواله و عظم شانه ..."', "Title from rubricated inscription on 'title page' (p.29).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of a work of materia medica (pharmacopoeia) by ʻAlī ibn al-Ḥusayn al-Anṣārī known as Ḥājjī Zayn al-ʻAṭṭār (d.1403 or 4) with extensive gloss on the margins. Opens with acephalous contents listing (p.1-21). Contributions to the cataloguing from Elizabeth Kunze.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 30', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.134a-134b (p.267-268), composition by Muḥammad ibn ʻAlī al-Birgilī [al-Birkilī] finished in 973 [1565 or 6]. This copy by Aḥmad ibn ʻAbdī with transcription finished "tamma al-taswīd..." in the year 1048 [1638 or 9] likely in Istanbul.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 80. Imtihan al-aḏkiya." ; on fol.1a (p.1) "١٨٠".', 'Binding: Pasteboards (delaminating, composed of recycled paper with writing in black ink still visible) covered in marbled paper with spine and turn-ins in leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; interior of fore-edge flap in rose-tinted paper ; sewn in brown thread, two stations ; thread snapped in places, loose in others, elsewhere entirely missing ; fragments of primaries for endbands remain, bright blue and yellow, but neither band intact ; cover ill-fitting with leather shrinkage and expansion and cockling of text-block ; leather is cracking across fore-edge and spine, abraded at corners, red rot ; text block intact except for occasional loose leaves.', 'Support: European laid paper with laid lines vertical spaced roughly 11 laid lines per cm. and chain lines horizontal spaced roughly 28 mm. apart ; very lightly burnished ; no clumping of fibers but some inclusions ; several watermarks including large circle with "M" and profile of duck (see fol.5/fol.8, etc.), crest or scrollwork containing bird with wings outstretched (see fol.22, etc.), crest / scrollwork / arms containing three flowers / lilies (see fol.30, 36, etc.), circle including two hollow six-pointed stars with single star in cone or basket shape (see fol.74, fol.81, etc.) ; some water damage to bottom and top edges intermittently throught text ; minor pest damage throughout ; some leaves have yellower appearance than others ; some foxing ; fingerprints and smudges in both red and black ink ; leaves of first quire loose and fragile, obscuring text on inner margins particularly ; conservation treatement of fol.12 reinforcing loose page along stub with Japanese paper and sodium CMC.', 'Decoration: Textual dividers in the form of red dots ; text rubricated with chapter and section breaks, rare vocalization (fol.14b/p.28), overlining, some marginal glosses and notabilia, sigla and abbreviations within glosses, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh/nastaʻlīq ; strong effect of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, virtually sans serif, right-slanting, strokes rather than dots for pointing, lām-alif al-mukhaffafa, occasionally superscripting final letter of line, straight but slanted free-standing alif with obliquely cut head, final yāʼ mardūdah.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: VI (12), 11 V (122), VI (134) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Authorial" and "scribal," rectangular then triangular, reads: "تم هذه النسخة الشريفة المباركة تصنيف الفاضل الكامل العالم العامل محمد البركلى حراه الله بما يحبه ويرضاه ... تم الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب في يدا [كذا] عبد الضعيف احمد بن عبدي تم الرسالة المسماة بامتحان الاذكيا للعلامة المتاخرين و الفهامة المدققين كاشف المشكلات الدينية رافع المعضلات اليقينية صدر الشريفة النبوية مجي الطريقة الاحمدية صاحب التاليف و التحرير ذو العلم الراسخ في التقرير الشيخ محمد بن علي البالكروي تاريخ تصنيف الشيخ في سنة ٩٧٣ تم التسويد على يد عبد الضعيف احمد بن عبدي بعون الله الملك المنان الكريم ... البلاد دكزلي غفر الله له و احسن اليها و اليه بمقام قصتنطية [قسطنطنية؟] قرب عسى قابوسى سراي مصطفى بابك [؟] ادم الله تع عمره ودولته . . سنة ثمان و اربعين والف"', 'Explicit: "كاف المؤنث وقفا حفظا بحركتهما لا تلتبس بكاف المذكر نحو اكرمتكس ومررت بكس"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله و سلام على عباده الذين اصطفى خصوصا منهم على السراج المنبر المصطفى و صلوة عليه و عليهم مصفى و مستصفى ... و بعد فلما اردت [ان] ادرس كتاب اللب المنسوب الى الامام الاوحدى عمر القاضي البيضاوي عليه رحمة العزيز القوي سالني بعض اصحابي ان اكتب لهم شرحا يحل عقد الفاظه و مبانيه ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on fol.1a (p.1) and colophon.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Commentary on Lubb al-albāb, a treatise on grammar by ʻAbd Allāh ibn ʻUmar al-Bayḍawī (d. ca. 685/1286), itself an abridgment of al-Kāfiyah by Ibn Ḥājib (d. 646/1249). Description provided mainly by Sarah Mirza.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 870', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. suggest mid to late 16th or early 18th century dating ; dated ownership statement (see p.15, 184, etc.) provides terminus ante quem of 1750.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with description (in hand of E. Husselman ?) "Hari-Karana, son of Mathurā-dāsa, Multānī. | Inshā. | Cat. of Pers. Bks. in BM Cat. several editions | n. f. in Mich. MSS." and (in hand of G. Meredith-Owens ?) "A work on epistolary style." -- b. Slip with note "Counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" -- c. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) Husselman notes"', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 19', 'Binding: Boards covered in shell \'marbled\' paper (mainly in pink, blue and yellow) with orange-brown leather over spine and board corners (approaching half-binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in grey paper ; spine gold-stamped with "HER | KERN" and decorative bands ; edges of text block flecked with red ; sewn in white thread over three recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands ; overall in somewhat poor condition with much abrasion, deterioration of leather, lifting and losses of spine leather, etc.', 'Support: European and non-European (likely Indian or Persian) laid paper ; opening gathering in a paper with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct, curving) and no laid lines clearly visible, cloudy formation, thin and transluscent though sturdy, burnished, grayish tint ; thereafter (from p.31) in a European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal or vertical), chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart (vertical or horizontal), and watermarks of three crescents (roughly 72 mm. long, parallel to chains, see p.40, 78, 112, etc.) and mount of six coupeaux with star above (see p.102, 126, 154, etc.), sturdy, medium cream in color, well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords and headings rubricated (text to be entered in red entered in inner margins) ; overlining in red ; occasional textual dividers in the form of red hāʼ.', 'Script: Shikastah-taʻlīq (taʻlīq with elements of shikastah) ; bold, elegant Indian [?] chancery hand in a heavy line ; partially seriffed with left-sloping head-serifs and highly ligatured with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, occasional reversed or recurved final descenders, etc.', 'Layout: Written in roughly 10 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 6 (6), IV (14), 11 III(80), III-1 (85), 6 (91), ii ; almost exclusively ternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of black strokes, lower outer corner of right-hand leaf, upper outer corner of left-hand leaf ; some added leaves (six each at the opening and close of the codex) bound in upside down ; catchwords present ; pagination initially in black ink, continued in pencil, Western numerals (every other leaf) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inner flyleaves and added leaves).', 'Incipit: "بعد از حمد وثنای مر حضرت ایزد متعال ذو الحلال والافضال ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.15).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the collection of model letters of appointment and other official documents compiled (certainly after 1625, possibly after 1645) by Harkarn [Harkaran] ibn Mathurādās of Multān, secretary (munshī) of Iʻtibār Khān (d.1625). Contribution to the cataloguing from Hossein Mottaghi.'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Anchor in circle; two anchors with REGISTER PAPER/1870 in roman. For the first see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), nos. 1-8.', 'Contains astronomical figures and tables.', 'Text rubricated; marginal commentaries and corrections in hand of copyist.', 'On timekeeping and determining the direction of the qiblah by observation of the movements of the stars, in 4 arkān; copy missing its first page, but all of muqaddimah is complete.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 392', 'Origin: As appears at close of preface (p.2), composed end of Ṣafar 1291 [1874]. This copy likely executed shortly afterward.', 'Former shelfmark: "156 [or 256 ?] T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" and "254" in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in painted lacquerwork with brown leather over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; two-piece binding (overlapping flanges visible at spine, exterior and interior) ; doublures each in painted lacquerwork, a solid red field ; upper and lower covers carry paintings depicting each of two gates of Tehran (Darvāzah-i Dawlat on upper cover, Darvāzah-i Nāṣirīyah on lower cover) as indicated by inscriptions "دروازه دولت در طهران" and "دروازه ناصريه در طهران" ; sewn in cream thread, eight and four stations ; overall in fairly good condition with minor losses of lacquer and paint.', 'Support: Opening gathering in non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with roughly 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, curving, somewhat indistinct) and no chain lines plainly visible, cloudy formation, inclusions, dense and fairly thick though transluscent, beige to gray in color, well-sized and burnished ; paintings on sturdy paper now affixed with adhesive to quite heavy, opaque sheets of paper, cream in color.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouch flanked by vegetal motifs in gold on fields of lapiswith bright green and red accents surmounted by a well of red with white crosses flanked by narrow green bands filled with swirling vegetal and floral motifs (saz leaves, etc.) in gold with white, red, blue and green accents set among an empty scalloped medallion and triangular edge pieces to give a vaguely w-shaped effect ; written area throughout surrounded by gold frame with outermost blue rule, margins also outlined in narrow gold bands defined by black fillets ; headings and vocalization in rubricated ; text followed by eight fine watercolor portraits of the envoys (compare figures as they appear in watercolors based on the life-size wall paintings at Nigāristān Palace, see AKM00502 Aga Khan Museum and no.34 in Diba, ed. Royal Persian Paintings: The Qajar Epoch 1785-1925).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; exquisite hand in a medium line ; characteristically serifless with effect of words gently descending to baseline, elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in distinct but conjoined dots, bowl of nūn wide and angled with dot set just down within.', 'Layout: Written chiefly in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, IV (8), 4 I(16), i ; single quaternion followed by composed "single bifolia" hinged together with strips of cloth ; catchwords present ; each painting mounted on the verso of a separate leaf with the recto left blank ; foliation in pencil, Hindu-Arabic numerals, appearing on recto of leaves carrying paintings (begins with ١ on first leaf, p.17) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "... اواخر رجبده نامه همايونك جوابنى اخذ ايله عودت ايلديلر"', 'Incipit: "فتحعلى شاه زماننده رجال ومأمورين دولت عليه دن ايرانه كلمشن اولان بعض ددانك [ذواتك] تصويرلرى طهرانده شاه مشار اليهك انشا كرده سى اولان نكارستان كوشكى ديوارنده نقش اولنمش اولمغله تصاوير مذكوره و ايران تاريخلرنده بونلره متعلق دسترس اوله بيلديكم بعض معلومات اشبو رساله يه نقل و درج اولندى غرض نقشی است کز ما بازماند که هستی را نمی بینم بقایی فی اواخر سهر صفر من سنة الف ومأتین و واحد و تسعین يسجى زاده سيد عبد الوهاب افندى بيك ايكى يوز يكرمى التى سنه سنده شاكر وحيرت افندىلر دخى رفاقتده اولديغىحالده خاقان خلد آشيان سلطان محمود خان ثانى طرفندن سفارتله فتحعلى شاه نزدينه ارسال اولنوب ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '22. p.32 : عويف ابن السيد الحضرمى فرستاده والى يمن بنزد فتحعلى شاه.', '21. p.31 : [blank].', '20. p.30 : شيخ محمد سفير سعود ابن عبد العزيز الوهابى بنزد فتحعلى شاه.', '19. p.29 : [blank].', '18. p.28 : عبد الرحمن پاشا بابان.', '17. p.27 : [blank].', '16. p.26 : جلال الدين افندى سفير سلطان محمود خان ثانى بنزد فتحعلى شاه.', '15. p.25 : [blank].', '14. p.24 : سركاتب سيد عبد الوهاب افندى سفير سلطان محمود خان ثانى بنزد فتحعلى شاه.', '13. p.23 : [blank].', '12. p.22 : شاكر افندى مأمور معيت سيد عبد الوهاب افندى سفير عثمانى.', '11. p.21 : [blank].', '10. p.20 : حيرات افندى مأمور معيت سيد عبد الوهاب افندى سفير عثمانى.', '9. p.19 : [blank].', '8. p.18 : سيد عبد الوهاب افندى سفير سلطان محمود ثانى بنزد فتحعلى شاه.', '7. p.16-p.17 : [blank].', '6. p.15 : سليمان افندى.', '5. p.6-p.15 : عبد الرحمن پاشا بابان.', '4. p.4-p.6 : جلال الدين فندى.', '3. p.2-p.4 : يسجى زاده سيد عبد الوهاب افندى.', '2. p.2 : [preface].', '1. p.1 : [blank].', 'Exquisite copy of a short treatise composed by Mehmet Tahir Münif Paşa (d.1910) (see p.28-29, Ek I (147-152), Ek V, Ek VIII in Akın, Münif Paşa ve Türk kültür tarihindeki yeri and p.435-436 in Budak, Batılılaşma sürecinde çok yönlü bir Osmanlı aydını : Münif Paşa) chiefly on envoys sent from the Ottoman sultan Mahmud II (r.1808 to 1839) to the court of Fatḥ ʻAlī Shāh Qājār (r.1797-1834) and depicted in the wall paintings at Nigāristān Palace. Accompanied by fine watercolor portraits of these individuals and other envoys at the court. Addressed in the text are the ambassador Yescizade [Yasincizade] Seyyid Abdülvehhab Efendi (Seyit Abdülvahap Efendi) (d.1833), the ambassador Celalüddin Efendi, Aburrahman Paşa-yı Baban, and Süleyman Efendi. Addressed in the portraits are Abdülvahap Efendi, his attachés Hayret Efendi and Șakir Efendi and his serkatip, Celalüddin Efendi, Aburrahman Paşa-yı Baban, Shaykh Muḥammad (ambassador of Saʻūd ibn ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz), and ʻUwayf ibn al-Sayyid al-Ḥaḍramī (envoy of the governor of Yemen).'])

en: (count: ['Contains geometrical diagrams and mathematical tables.', 'Text rubricated; extensive marginal commentary in hand of copyist and in another hand in pencil.', 'Date and name of copyist/owner in colophon: tamma ... ʻalá yad kātibihi wa-mālikihi al-faqīr Muḥammad ʻAbd Allāh al-Maghribī aṣlan al-Sikindarī waṭanan ... fī shahr Ṣafar al-khayr ... sanat 1174 [September-October 1760].', "For Zād al-musāfir, the author's extract of this work, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 708.", '"A treatise on sundial theory with tables for latitude 30⁰, Cairo." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 73.', '"A treatise on the construction of hour angles." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1023', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.347, transcription and subsequent collation completed 2 Jumādá II 1106 [ca. 18 January 1695].', 'Accompanying materials: Slip torn from a page printed with prayers (paginated pp.5-6).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 172', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in dark red brown leather ; upper and lower cover carry traces of a tooled border with onlays ; sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and light green, good condition ; overall in poor condition with much abrasion, lifting and deterioration of spine leather, pest damage, losses at board corners, warping and slight negative draw in covers, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 10-11 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines only occasionally faintly visible ; well-burnished, quite thin, crisp and transluscent though sturdy, beige to dark cream in color ; some staining and pest damage.', 'Decoration: Keywords, headings, notabilia and abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke overlining keywords) rubricated ; text to be entered in red indicated in margins though nearly cut off ; textual dividers in the form of red dots ; overlining and some vocalization in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Persianate hand in a thin line ; mainly serifless (though left-sloping head-serif occasionally appears on lām, etc.) with slight effect of tilt to the left, some elongation of horizontal strokes, curvilinear descenders (some sweeping), adhering to baseline though some letters and words occasionally superscript, freely ligatured, point of final nūn typically assimilated with bowl, pointing in distinct dots, final yāʼ unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 16 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iii, 17 IV(136), III+1 (143), 3 IV(167), II-1 (170) ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; middle of the quire marks in the form of oblique strokes in opposite outer corners ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, nearly cut off ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب وبلغ المقابلة [مرتين] في يوم الاثنين من شهر جمادى الاخر سنة ١١٠۶ ..."', 'Explicit: "ولا تزعن من قلبه محبتي وعليك سلامي ورحمتي"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين وصلى الله على محمد خاتم النبيين وعلى آله الطاهرين اما بعد فانه لما استولى سلطان الشهوة والغضب على الآدميين ومحبة كل منهم لنفسه ... عملت هذا الكتاب وسميته بارشاد القلوب الى الصواب المنجى من عمل به من اليم العقاب ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.10.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the opening part of al-Daylamī's collection of sermons, ḥadīth, narrations pertaining to ʻAlī the other Imāms, etc."])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Andrea Galvani of Pordenone; three crescents; cursive initials TMC. For the first two see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), pp. 24 and 36 and no. 860.', 'Contains geometrical diagrams.', "Text rubricated; copy incomplete, diagrams for last two signatures not present; dealer's (?) note in pencil on front of manuscript: Irshād al-sāʾil ilá uṣūl al-masāʾil sharḥ risālat Sibṭ al-Māridīnī fī ʻilm al-mīqāt sumiya al-Durr al-manthūr fī al-ʻamal bi-rubʻ al-dustūr.", 'On sundials and the quadrant.', '"A commentary on al-Durr al-manthūr fī al-ʻamal bi-rubʻ al-dustūr of ʻAbd Allāh ibn Khalīl ibn Yūsuf, al-Māridīnī (see [Mich. Isl. Ms.] 689).... The last two quires in the manuscript do not appear to belong to it.... Whether the text is the same has not been determined." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 998', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon, though likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and eventually bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974). As appears on \'title page\' for section five (see p.99), copied by the anonymous "ا ع" who has identified himself as the copyist of other manuscripts eventually bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974), see Isl. Ms. 905, Isl. Ms. 910, Isl. Ms. 937, Isl. Ms. 981, Isl. Ms. 988 and likely Isl. Ms. 929.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 147', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "متن الاشارات | J.H.D." ; sewn in cream thread over three recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Wove paper.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a bold line ; serifless and freely ligatured with effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 11-13 lines per page.', "Collation: i, IV (8), V (18), VIII (34), VII (48), VI (60), 3 VIII(108), i ; an assortment of gatherings with several octonions ; blank pages left between sections (each corresponding to a gathering) with some serving as 'title pages' for those sections (see pp.3, 19, 39, 71, 99, etc.) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).", 'Explicit: "ولعلك تقول ايضا فان كان القدر فلم العقاب فتأمل جواب ان العقاب للنفس على خطيئتها كما ستعلم فهو كالمرض للبدن على نهمه فهو لازم من لوازم ما ساق اليه الاحوال الماضية التي لم يكن من وقوعها بد ولا من وقوع ما يتبعها واما الذي يكون على جهة اخرى من مبدء له من خارج فحديث اخر"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وآله وبعد فهذه اشارات الى اصول وتنبيهات على جمل يستبصر بها من تيسر له ولا ينتفع بالاصرح منها من تعسر عليه وعلى الله التكلان ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful though incomplete copy of Ibn Sīnā’s (d.1037) al-Ishārāt wa-al-tanbīhāt.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 677', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest 16th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From \'title page,\' "IL 414" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in now dull yellow European laid paper (three crescent watermark visible) with red leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in marbled paper in blue and cream yellow ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in cream and pink, significant losses at head and tail ; overall in somewhat poor condition with significant staining and abrasion, losses to upper board at lower corner, upper cover fully detached at spine, lifting and losses of leather, foreedge flap detaching at lower cover, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of perhaps two types ; mainly with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (vertical), and anchor (two line) in circle with star above watermark (see p.40, 46, 56, 60, 100, etc.) ; another type with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 29 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of font with lid and cross [leaf] (or cardinal’s mitre / chapeau) (see p.26 and compare Chapeau nos. 3447, etc. in Briquet, Les Filigranes, Chapeau nos.2-8 in Velkov, Les Filigranes dans les documents Ottomans and nos. 31-32 in Nikolaev, Watermarks of the Ottoman Empire, vol. 1) ; sturdy and well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; some section headings in green-blue ; written area and columns within surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Naskh ; compact, elegant, Turkish hand ; virtually serifless with very slight tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, occasional sweeping tails on qāf, etc., freely ligatured, pointing in strokes and distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page with written area divided to four columns and two lines of verse per line, for 42 lines of verse per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 2 IV(16), VII (30), 2 IV(46), V (56), VI (68), V+1 (79), V (89), IV-2 (95) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between pp.167-168).', 'Explicit: "خيرله اولسون دني عقبيده شاد احمديى هر كه ايده خيرله ياد"', 'Incipit: "ذكر بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم قامونسدن [قامونسنه] بزه كيدر اى حكيم هر كيمككم يولداشى توفيق اولا هرنه سوزكم سويليا تحقيق اولا"', "Title from inscriptions on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the work by the renowned Ottoman poet Ahmedî on the life and deeds of Alexander the Great, expanding on the features of the legend as they appear in Firdawsī and Niẓāmī with many philosophical digressions and ending with a sketch of Islamic history concluding with an important versified history of the Ottomans.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Crown with grapes; VINHA(?)/AGREST in roman.', 'Tables rubricated.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 512', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p. 276, Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam copied by Aḥmad ibn Abī al-Khayr known as al-Khawlī with transcription completed 23 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1017 [ca. 30 March 1609]. As appears in colophon on p.294, final work executed by the same copyist with transcription completed in the latter part of the year 1017 [1609]. Opening work likely copied around the same time.', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "I L 13" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in green-blue cloth ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in a white and blue wove paper ; resewn in white thread, eight stations ; overall in good condition ; attached to the textblock in an inverted manner, with flap on effective upper cover rather than lower cover.', 'Support: European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 29 mm. apart (horizontal), and anchor in circle with trefoil above watermark (see p.50, 56, etc.) ; well-burnished to glossy, dark cream in color ; repairs at opening in wove paper ; some ink burn (see pp.201-206, etc.) ; staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke overlining keywords, signes de renvoi, etc.) rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red hāʼ, three inverted commas, etc.', "Script: Naskh ; mainly one clear Egyptian or 'Syrian' hand (though ink and pen thickness varies, and some sections may be provided in different hands) ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline, some elongation of horizontal strokes, curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in distinct dots though casual, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf).", 'Layout: Written in 18-21 lines per page ; for sections of poetry, written area divided to two columns to set off verses.', 'Collation: i, 4 V(40), IV+1 (49), 6 V(109), II (113), 2 V(133), I (135), V+1 (146), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; possible foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, verso of each leaf through p.22 only ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: [Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam] "Scribal," triangular, reads "كمل الكتاب المبارك بحمد الله وعونه وحسن توفيقه يوم الاحد ثالث عشرين الحجة سنة سبعة عشر بعد الالف احسن الله عاقبها في خير على يد افقير عباد الله احمد بن ابي الخير الشهير بالخولي عفا الله عنا وعنه وعن المسلمين اجمعين امين" ; [al-Muʻashsharāt] "Scribal," reads, "تمت القصائد بحمد الله وعونه وحسن توفيقه وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وذلك على يد الحقير الفقير المعترف بالعجز والتقصير الراجي عفو ربه القدير احمد بن ابي الخير الشهير بالخولي عفا الله عنا وعنه وغفر لنا وله ولوالديه ولجميع المسلمين اجمعين والحمد لله رب العالمين بتاريخ اواخر سنة سبعة عشر بعد الالف"', 'Incipit: [al-Isrā ilá al-maqām al-asrā] "قال سيدنا ومولانا وامامنا وقدوتنا الى الله سبحانه وتعالى الشيخ الامام العلامة ... محيي الدين ابو عبد الله محمد بن علي بن العربي الطاي الحاتمي الاندلسي ... اما بعد الحمد لله الذي سلخ نهاره من ليله المظلم واطلع فيها شمسه المنيرة ..." ; [Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam] "وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله رب يسر وتمم قال سيدنا وشيخنا ... محيي الملة والدين ابو عبد الله محمد بن علي بن محمد بن العربي الطاي الحاتمي الاندلسي ... الحمد لله منزل الحكم على قلوب الكلم ..." ; [al-Muʻashsharāt] "قال الشيخ الكبير الامام ابو عبد الله ابن العربي عملت هذه القصائد على حروف المعجم المزدوج باب الالف ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '3. p.277-p.294 : al-Dīwān al-ṣaghīr al-musammá bi-al-Muʻashsharāt / Ibn al-ʻArabī.', '2. p.87-p.276 : [Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam] / Ibn al-ʻArabī.', '1. p.3-p.86 : Kitāb al-Isrā ilá al-maqām al-asrā / Ibn al-ʻArabī.', 'A collection (majmūʻah) of three works by Ibn ʻArabī, al-Shaykh al-Akbar (d.1240), including al-Isrāʼ ilá al-maqām al-asrá, Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam, and al-Muʻashsharāt.'])

en: (count: ['Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 36 and no. 860.', 'Contains astronomical diagrams.', 'Text and diagrams rubricated; marginal notes and corrections in hand of copyist (same as that of Mich. Isl. Ms. 807,2) and others; kurrāsahs numbered 1-9; copy defective, pp. [43-44] and [57-58] missing.', 'Date and name of copyist in colophon: katabahu al-faqīr ... ʻAbd al-Fattāḥ Aḥmad Ṣiwān al-Mālikī ... fī yawm al-sabt al-mubārak 28 shahr min Dhī al-Ḥijjah khitām sanat 1258 [i.e. 30 January 1843].', 'Pp. [1-163]. Bound with: ʻAlī al-Malāqī al-Andalusī, al-Waḍʻ ʻalá al-jihāt fī al-basāʾiṭ wa-al-munḥarifāt, pp. [166-180].', '"A commentary on the treatise on the sinuated quadrant of Jamāl al-Dīn ʻAbd Allāh ibn Khalīl ibn Yūsuf, al-Māridīnī." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Crown surmounted by 6-pointed star and crescent. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), no. 1132.', 'Contains illustrations of types of comets.', 'Title and text rubricated and enclosed in red borders; illumination in color and gold leaf on p. [3]; text partially vocalized.', 'Date and name of copyist in colophon: taḥrīran fī thāmin Rabʻ̄ al-thānī sanat 1107 [i.e. 16 November 1695] ʻalá yad muʾallifihā al-ʻabd al-faqīr ʻAbd Allāh al-Maqdisī al-Ḥanbalī.', 'Pp. [3-23]. Bound with: [2] Bahāʾ al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥusayn al-ʻĀmilī, Khulāṣat al-ḥisāb, pp. [26-88]; [3] Qusṭā ibn Lūqā, Kitāb al-ʻamal bi-al-kurah al-falakīyah, pp. [89-149].', '"It does not seem to be the same as his Tuḥfat al-albāb fī bayān ḥukm [dhawāt] al-adhnāb (for which see [Mich. Isl. Ms. 688])." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.', 'A treatise on the astrological significance of various kinds of comets and pseudocomets.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Three crescents. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Contains astronomical tables.', 'Title and text rubricated; text and corrections in margins enclosed by thin red lines.', 'Possible date of early to mid-18th cent. based on death date of author.', 'al-Khawānikī\'s commentary on Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Abī al-Fatḥ al-Ṣūfī al-Miṣrī\'s Nubdhat al-isʻāf fī maʻrifat qaws al-khilāf, "a short treatise on a technique used in the compilation of ephemerides." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 83.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 32', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.161, [1] copied by ʻAlī ibn Muṣṭafá in Istanbul (in the Çavuş Medresesi [?]) with transcription completed Rabīʻ I 1139 [1726]. As appears in colophon on p.242, [2] copied in Kilis, first of Rajab 1102 [ca. 31 March 1691] (name of copyist not provided). Works [3] and [4] lack dated colophons though likely copied at the time of [2].', 'Accompanying materials: Slip carrying glosses, etc. (paginated pp.235-236).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 142. Ithbat al-wajib, with commentaries." ; "۳۹۱".', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather and mint-green tinted paper ; upper and lower covers bear border and cornerpieces in incised fillets ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; sewn in dark pink thread, two stations, with primaries in yellow ; endbands in yellow and pink ; in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of paper and leather, slight spine slant (cocked), etc.', 'Support: European laid paper in several types ; paper of [1] well-burnished, quite smooth and glossy with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 21-22 mm. apart (horizontal) ; papers of [2], [3], and [4] including one with laid lines 9-10 per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 20-29 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of crown above bar with initials "V R N" above grapes (see p.230, 242, 510, 514, etc.) and \'B B\' countermark ; flyleaves in a bright orange surface tinted European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Simple illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) on fol.1b (p.4) in effect of rectangular piece surmounted by semi-circular piece (dome) and vertical stalks (tīgh) all in gold ; red rule-border appears surrounding text of first work ; gold frame surrounds text of incipit and facing page for first work ; all texts rubricated with keywords, headings, overlining, etc. in red ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas.', 'Script: Naskh ; several Turkish and or Persianate hands ; hand of [1] approaching nastaʻlīq, serifless with effect of tilt to the right and occasional descent of words to baseline ; majority hand supplying [2], [3] and [4] rather similar, serifless with mainly closed counters, occasional sweeping descenders, interesting form of قوله with waw, lām and hāʼ assimilated in an upward and right-sweeping loop ; hand near close of [2] exhibits strong effect of tilt to the left and descent of words to baseline.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines [1], 17 lines [2], 17 lines [3] and 19 lines [4] per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 10 V(100), VI (112), IV (120), 5 V(170), II (174), 8 V(254), I+1 (257), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present (both set apart and simply repeating last word of final line at head of first line of recto of following leaf) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and insert).', 'Colophon: [1] "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "كتبه علي بن مصطفى قريه نورشوى [؟] عفى ذنوبه غفر غفر الله ولوالديه واحسن اليهما في بلدة قسطنطنية بمدرسة چاوش ... دار الحديث في شهر ربيع الاول سنة تسع وثلاثون ومائة والف" ; [2] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت الرسالة المتبركة في اثبات الواجب المنسوبة الى المولى المحقق الجلال الدواني الصديقي في بلد كليس في اول رجب في سنة اثنان ومائة بعد بعد [كذا] الف"', 'Explicit: "قوله ولا بد من فيه من دليل اقول الدليل عليه ان الشيء الاول الذي كان وجود العلة دائرا على وجوده اذا عدم كان يكفي"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على خير خلقه محمد خاتم النبيين وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين قوله ففيما ذكره تفسير او تفريع بطريق الدمج ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '6. fol.256b-fol.257b : [blank].', '5. fol.175a-fol.256a : Ḥāshiyat Ithbāt al-wājib / lil-Mīrzā Jān.', '4. fol.174b-fol.175a : [blank].', '5. fol.122b-fol.174a : Sharḥ Ithbāt al-wājib / lil-Ḥanafī.', '4. fol.121a-fol.122a : [blank].', '3. fol.81a-fol.120b : al-Risālah al-Mutabarrakah fī Ithbāt al-wājib / lil-Dawānī [Dawwānī].', '2. fol.80b : [blank].', '1. fol.1a-fol.80a : Ḥāshiyah ʻalá Ḥāshiyat Sharḥ Ithbāt al-wājib /li-QāḍʻĀbādī [Qāzābādī].', "Neat composite copy of a collection of texts (majmūʻah / mecmua) pertaining to the Risālah fī Ithbāt al-wājib of Jalāl al-Dīn al-Dawānī, opening with a supergloss by Qāzābādī on the supergloss of Mīrzā Jān on the commentary attributed to Mullā Ḥanafī, next the matn of al-Dawānī's Risālah, next the commentary attributed to Mullā Ḥanafī and finally the supergloss of Mīrzā Jān, which ends abruptly and appears incomplete."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 33', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon, though paper would suggest 18th century, likely . Inscription on fol.1a (p.3) appears to identify copyist (and former owner) as Mehmet Şakir.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 82. Ithbat al-wujud."', 'Binding: Pasteboards (semi-limp) covered in marbled paper (blue, green and yellow) with spine in red leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in yellow surface tinted laid paper ; flyleaves in peach-tinted laid paper ; sewn in dark pink thread, two stations, primaries in yellow and dark pink ; endbands in light-blue and pink ; in fair condition with some staining, abrasion, lifting of spine leather, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of a few different types ; mainly with 13-14 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22 mm. (vertical), smooth, well-burnished with watermark scroll or shield with lion rampant and "D V [?]" countermark ; first quire in a different European laid paper (watermark scrollwork difficult to examine) and flyleaves in still different European laid paper with three hats watermark.', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with keywords, overlining, abbreviations, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Turkish hand ; virtually serifless, though occasional right-sloping head serif appears on lām ; effect of tilt to the left and occasional slight effect of words descending to baseline ; descenders somewhat flattened ; occasional superscripting of final words of a line ; glosses appear to have been supplied in the same hand though in a thinner line and with frequent dramatic elongation of the horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 9 lines per page with roughly 32 lines of the gloss and 44 lines of the supergloss on the diagonal in the margins ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 7 V(70), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitiazation (includes flyleaves).', 'Explicit: "ولهذه المناقشة مزيد تفصيل ربما يعتبر عليه في تعليقاتنا وليكن هذا اخر الرسالة مع تفرق وتشتت البال ... ولكن هذا ربي يحقق الحق تمت"', 'Incipit: "سبحانك ما اعظم شانك واظهر برهانك انت الشاهد في العين ولا يشاهدك في العين ... وبعد فيقول الفقير الى عفو رب الحقيقي محمد بن اسعد الدواني الصديقي قد حررت في هذه الرسالة وجوه براهين اثبات الواجب جل ذكره ما اورده ائمة الحكمة والكلام ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Risālah fī Ithbāt al-wājib of Jalāl al-Dīn al-Dawānī, glossed with commentary of Mullā Ḥanafī on the inner margin and supergloss of Mīrzā Jān on the outer margin.'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Three crescents; face-in-the-moon in scrollwork; initials PG(?) in roman. For the first see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Contains trigonometric calculations.', 'Text rubricated; marginal commentary and corrections in hand of copyist (same as that of Mich. Isl. Ms. 752).', 'Commentary on a poem by the same author (unidentified) entitled Tuḥfat al-sādāt, on timekeeping and the use of the sine quadrant. Copy is defective: 1 f. missing between pp. [15-16] and another between pp. [23-24], at least one signature missing at end.'])

en: (count: ['Manuscript is undated; possibly 16th or 17th century.', "al-Bruṣawī is not listed in Brockelmann, but is mentioned under the entry on Ḍiyā' al-Dīn al-Khazrajī. Not found in British Museum Cat. of Arabic books and mss.", 'This codex contains two works by two different authors, both written in the same hand. The Iʻrāb al-Ṭariqiyyah is the first of these two works, beginning on the first page of the manuscript and continuing until page 93. The second work, Kitāb al-anwār al-saʻādah fī sharḥ al-kalimatay al-shahādah, by al-Kāfiyajī begins on page 99, and continues until page 131. On the page preceding this second work (page 98), are found two rubāʻīs in Persian, written in a different hand from the main works.', 'Simple leather bound codex. Upper cover is detached; leather is crumbling away from the backing. Text written in black naskh script with rubrications. There are many notations in a different hand in the margins as well as on the final page.', 'Grammatical analysis and explanation of various sūrahs of the Qur\'ān, beginning with the entirety of al-Fātiḥah (sūrah 1), an-Nās (sūrah 114), al-Falaq (sūrah 113), and then al-Ikhlāṣ (sūrah 112). Then, special attention is paided to Sūrat al-Ṭāriq (sūrah 86) and to the āyat al-kursī (the "throne verse") in Sūrat al-Baqarah (sūrah 2). Composed in 877/1472-3.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 469', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.135, opening work copied by al-Ḥājj Ḥasan ibn al-Ḥājj ʻUthmān (Hacı Hasan b. Hacı Osman), imām in Sultanahmet Camii, with transcription completed 28 Rajab 1242 [ca. 25 February 1827] likely in Istanbul. As appears in preceding authorial colophon (pp.134-5) composition completed Shaʻbān 1168 [May-June 1755]. All works appear to be in the hand of the same copyist. As appears in colophon on p.221, transcription of final work completed in 10 Shawwāl 1242 [ca. 7 May 1827].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inscription on inner front cover, "IL 457" and "M. 46" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (in shades blue, orange, yellow, pink and black) with light brown leather over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins (framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in sea green surface-dyed laid paper ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; endbands mainly gone ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10-11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 32 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of eagle (see p.12, 13,etc.) alternating with lion in scrollwork (see p.10, 14, etc.), thin and transluscent though sturdy, light burnished ; pastedowns / flyleaves in paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 29 mm. apart (vertical), and crescent with face in shield watermark (78 mm. tall, see back flyleaf) ; some staining.', 'Decoration: Some overlining also in black ink.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Turkish hand ; virtually serifless with effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing (two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots, some free assimilation of letters.', 'Layout: Written in 20-34 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 11 V(110), i ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: [al-Iʼtilāf] "Authorial," reads "وقد وقع الفراغ منه في ليلة الاحد من ايام شهر شعبان من شهور سنة ثمان وستين ومائة والف من هجرة من يأخذ العفو ويأمر بالعرف ..." ; [al-Iʼtilāf] "Scribal," reads "سوده الفقير الحقير الى رحمة ربه القدير الحاج حسن بن الحاج عثمان عليهما الرحمة والغفران المدعو بامام الثاني في جامع سلطان احمد خان عليه العفو والغفران وقد فرغت من تمنيق [تنميق] هذه النسخة المباركة التي الفها الشيخ المام ... شيخنا واستاذ استاذنا عبد الله افندى المعروف بيوسف افندى زاده ... يوم الثامن والعشرين من ليلة رجب شهر الله المحرم من سنة اربع واثنين وبعد مائتي الف من هجرة من له العزة والشرف اللهم ارحم لمؤلفه وناسخه وناظره ومطالعه ولجميع المؤمنين والمؤمنات برحمتك يا ارحم الراحمين امين يا معين م م م تمت م"', 'Explicit: [al-Iʼtilāf] "فامالة جاء للداجوني عن هشام مجري على وجوه البسملة والوصل والسكت كلها وكذا الفتح للحلواني عنه هذا ما تيسر لي من جميع الوجوه لبعض القراء والرواة في بعض الايات القرآنية على ترتيب السورة القرآنية على ما اخذنا من افواه المشايخ الكرام والائمة الاعلام مع تطبيق الطرق على قدر الامكان وان كان يضيق عن احاطتها نطاق البيان"', 'Incipit: [al-Iʼtilāf] "الحمد لله الذي انزل القرآن على سبعة احرف تيسيرا ... بعد فيقول العبد الفقير الى عفو ربه القدير عبد الله بن محمد الشهير بيوسف افندى زاده ... لقد طال حال خلدي ان اجمع على ترتيب للسور القرآنية بعض الايات التي اجتمع فيها الاختلاف من الوجوه والروايات من قراآت الائمة العشر ... وسميته الائتلاف في وجوه الاختلاف ..." ; [Risālah fī ʻilm al-qirāʼah] "الحمد لله الملك القوي المتين الذي نزل الذكر على رسوله محمد الامين ... وبعد فاني قد سمعت عن انه قد حكى اذا ذهبت الى مجلس ورأيت فيه عالما كبيرا من العلماء فاذا جاء الى هذا المجلس امام كبيرة العمامة وجلس فبعد زمان سأل منه ذلك العالم الكبير مسئلة من مسائل علم القرأة وهي اليوم يقرأ هكذا ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '13. p.216-p.221 : [treatise pertaining to the days of the week, in Turkish].', '12. p.214-215 : [verses of Abū Saʻīd Khān (Ebusait Han)].', '11. p. 211-p.214 : al-Risālah al-Raddīyah lil-ḍād / Yusuf Efendizade Abdullah bin Mehmet.', '10. p.205-p.211 : [silsilah or chain of transmitters in al-qirāʼāt from the year 1213 (1798 or 9) back to Ibn al-Jazarī, possibly for the copyist].', '9. p.202-p.204 : [brief passage in Turkish on ʻilm al-qirāʼah].', '8. p.187-p.201 : Hādhā Kitāb mushkilāt Shāṭibī / Yusuf Efendizade Abdullah bin Mehmet.', '7. p.174-p.186 : [Risālah fī al-iqrāʼ bi-al-shawādhdh] / Yusuf Efendizade Abdullah bin Mehmet.', '6. p.160-p.173 : Risālah fī bayān marātib al-madd fī qirāʼāt / Yusuf Efendizade Abdullah bin Mehmet.', '5. p.144-p.160 : [Risālah fī masāʼil mimmā yataʻallaqu bi-wujūhih al-Qurʼān] / Yusuf Efendizade Abdullah bin Mehmet.', '4. p.142-p.143 : [blank].', '3. 139-p.141 : [brief passage, apparently pertaining to the preceding, partly in Turkish and with excerpts from al-Nashr al-kabīr (of Ibn al-Jazarī ?)].', '2. p.136-p.139 : [Risālah fī ʻilm al-qirāʼah].', '1. p.3-p.135 : al-Iʼtilāf fī wujūh al-ikhtilāf fī ʻilm al-qirāʼah / Yusuf Efendizade Abdullah bin Mehmet.', 'Fine collection (majmūʻah) of works on the science of Qurʼānic readings (ʻilm al-qirāʼāt) mainly by Yusuf Efendizade Abdullah Hilmî b. Mehmet Amasî (d.1754) with a few brief passages in Turkish and a silsilah or chain of transmitters in al-qirāʼāt, possibly for the copyist / compiler of this majmūʻah.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Three crescents. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Contains astronomical tables.', 'Text and tables rubricated; marginal notes and calculations in hand of copyist (same as that of Mich. Isl. Ms. 769) and others.', "Tables for astronomical observations by day and night for Jerusalem (latitude 31⁰,50'). Copy defective (1+ leaf missing from first signature)."])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Anchor in circle. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), nos. 1-8.', 'Text and table rubricated; marginal corrections in hand of copyist; marginal notes in another hand.', 'Possible 17th-cent. date based on table showing correspondence of Islamic years 990-1500 [i.e. 5 February 1582-16 November 2077] with Coptic years 1299-1794.', 'Deals with the conversion of calendars in the Coptic and Islamic systems, making astronomical observations, and a very brief treatment of numerology. Text unidentified; copy defective (introduction missing), text begins with faṣl 1 and consists of 3 faṣls followed by 7 bābs and a khātimah. Colophon missing.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 491', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.406, Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī copied by Ibrāhīm ibn Mājid ibn ʻAbd Allāh al-Barādi‘ī al-Ramlī with transcription completed 23 Rabī‘ I 851 [ca. 8 June 1447] in Damascus, where he was residing.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.3-4) -- c. Slip marking opening of extract from al-Bukhārī in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.87-88) -- d. Small scraps left by inventory cataloguer (pp.225-226 and 241-242).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, p.5 (once \'opening\' leaf), inner back cover, and spine label, "IL 235" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in light brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in dark blue (indigo) laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla (filled with assymetrical vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OAi) and pendants, along with tooled rosette accents and rule-border ; design continues on flap ; sewing mainly gone but originally in two stations ; endbands gone ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather (mainly at spine), fore edge flap detaching, etc. as well as simply serving as a wrapper for this textblock (never fully attached) and grossly ill-fitting (most likely reuse of a cover made for a different manuscript, smaller in size ; see possible contents listing on upper board lining).', 'Support: non-European laid paper in at least two types ; Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim extract on a well-burnished and quite smooth paper with roughly 6-7 laid lines per cm. (20 in 30 mm., vertical) and grouped chain lines (possibly in threes and twos) with 9-14 between chains and 42-58 between groups (horizontal), some leaves yellow tinted, leaf carrying pp.79-80 delaminating, moisture damage resulting in minor blocking, possibly a second type as well ; Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī on a lightly burnished paper, thick and sturdy with roughly 7-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly diffuse, curved and sagging) and chain lines grouped in threes with 8-9 mm. between chains and 57-66 between groups (horizontal) ; replacement bifolium supplying pp.317-18 and 323-324 in European paper with scrollwork/coat of arms watermark with diamond flanked by C’s at center (compare motif as appears in Heawood no. 3728), crown and flanking plumes over "EAM" [or "FAM" ?].', 'Decoration: Keywords and abbreviation symbols (mainly sigla) rubricated ; some section headings in Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim chrysographed.', "Script: Naskh ; two elegant 'Syrian' hands ; hand supplying opening work [likely an extract from Muslim] serifless and fairly vertical, with curvilinear descenders (many sweeping), pointing in distinct dots, elongation of horizontal strokes, closed and open counters ; hand supplying al-Bukhārī virtually serifless (though slight right-sloping head-serifs appear irregularly) with slight effect of tilt to the left and occasional slight effect of words desending to baseline, pointing in distinct dots, alif following qāf often curving up and above ; partially vocalized.", 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of misṭarah evident).', 'Collation: [a poor, haphazard assemblage of anomalous quires, initially entirely out of order according to the extant catchwords and text, none fully intact, only a few bifolia intact] (40), V-1 (49), 14 (189), V-1 (198) ; chiefly quinions (where intact and discernible) ; quire numbering in the form of whole words with catch title in the upper outer corner of the recto of the opening leaf of each quire (mainly for Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, though appear twice in opening extract from Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim, indicating the 2nd and 20th quires of the seventh volume, see p.33 and p.61) catchwords present in Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and entered prior to collation and proper rearrangement of the quires in the opening section such their order is now pp.31-34, 71-72, 65-68, 73-74, 81-82, 79-80, 5-6, 29-30, 75-76, 63-64, 47-48, 39-40, 45-46, 37-38, 69-70, 77-78, 51-52, 13-22, 27-28, 35-36, 49-50, 83-86, 23-26, 41-44, 57-60, 55-56, 53-54, 61-62, 7-12 according to the catchwords and text as it appears in the Istanbul 1911-1915 edition).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "تم الجامع الصحيح لمحمد بن اسماعيل البخاري رحمة الله عليه والحمد لله والصلاة على رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم على يد اضعف الخلق واحوجهم الى عفو الله ورحمته العبد الفقير الذليل الحقير ابراهيم بن ماجد بن عبد الله البرادعي الرملي المقيم يومئذ بدمشق ووافق الفراغ من نسخه يوم الخميس ثالث عشرين من شهر ربيع الاول سنة احد وخمسين وثمانمائة وبالله التوفيق وهو حسبي ونعم الوكيل وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', 'Elegant copy of an odd twelfth volume of Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī (opening at p.89 in the first bāb of Kitāb al-Taʻbīr and closing with the final bāb of Kitāb al-Tawḥīd) preceded by a quite imperfect odd seventh volume of Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim (as extant, opening in Bāb Jawāz akhdh al-ujrah ʻalá al-ruqyah bi-al-Qurʼān wa-al-adhkār of Kitāb al-Salām and closing in Bāb Dhamm dhī al-wajhayn wa-taḥrīm fiʻlih of Kitāb al-Birr wa-al-ṣilah). Upper board lining carries a contents listing for a manuscript previously bound in this cover (very obviously ill-fitting this manuscript).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 561', 'Origin: According to colophon on fol.110a, copied by "Muḥammad ibn al-marḥūm al-maghfūr lahu al-ʻallāmah al-shaykh Muḥammad al-Miṣrī thumma al-Jabalāwī" with transcription completed ("wa-qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min naskhih...") on Sunday, 15 Rabīʻ II 1084 [ca. 30 July 1673] likely while residing in al-Lādhiqīyah [Latakia, Syria] ("nazīl thaghr al-Lādhiqīyah al-maḥrūsah"). Compare circumstances of transcription for Isl. Ms. 565, executed by the same copyist.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, "IL 74" and from recto of front flyleaf, "B.II.226" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in green/teal cloth; Western style binding with squares though tight-back; pastedowns and flyleaves in beige machine wove paper; now sewn over three recessed cords; likely not original to codex; in fairly good condition with some staining, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper ; mainly a type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 33 mm. apart (horizontal), and arms watermark with cross surmounted by crown and flanked by lions above two circles (upper with "M B" and lowest empty, see pp.46, 58, 192, etc.), thin and crisp though sturdy, cream in color, well-burnished ; a few leaves in another type with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 30 mm. apart (horizontal) and crown-star-crescent watermark (see front flyleaf, p.22, etc.), sturdy and thicker than the other type.', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with headings in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; small, compact ’Syrian’ hand in a narrow line ; partially though irregularly serriffed (mainly on lām of definite article) with effect of tilt to the left and slight effect of words descending to basline, curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in distinct dots, many closed counters, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf).', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: ii, V (10), I (12), VII (26), 8 V (106), 4 (110), i; catchwords present; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, from fol.1; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, corresponds to foliation.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم الكتاب بعون الملك المعين وقد وقع الفراغ من نسخه عروة [؟] يوم الاحد خامس عشر ربيع الثاني من شهور سنة اربعة وثمانين والف من الهجرة النبوية على يد ناسخه ... العبد الفقير الى مولاه الصمد محمد ابن المرحوم المغفور له العلامة الشيخ محمد المصري ثم الجبلاوي نزيل ثغر اللاذقية المحروسة غفر الله له ولوالديه ولمشايخه ولكل المسلمين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم امين"', 'Explicit: "وعن الشافعي لا يدخل في الوصية الا احمق او لص والله اعلم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله على ما انعم علينا من علم الشرائع والاحكام وهدانا الى معرفة ما لم نعلم بهداية الملك العلام ... اما بعد فاني لما رايت الهمم راغبة عن المطلوبات ... فاستصفيت المسائل المهمات من الفتوى المعتبرات ... وسميته بجامع الفتوى ... كتاب الطهارة"', 'Title from opening on fol.1b.', 'Ms. codex.', 'A compendium of legal decisions from various jurists compiled by Qirq Amrih (Kırk Emre) al-Ḥumaydī al-Ḥanafī (d.880/1475). Includes many glosses from the Lisān al-ḥukkām of Ibn al-Shiḥnah (d. 822/1477) and the Fatāwá of Qāḍī Khān (d. 592/1196).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 880', 'Origin: Colophon on fol.66a (p.121) does not specify date or place of transcription, nor identify copyist ; paper would suggest early to mid 19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip of paper with notes in handwriting of Meredith-Owens, marked \'MO. 1 PERSIAN\' reads: "Medical prescriptions by Yūsuf b. Muḥammad b. Yūsuf al-Ṭabīb. (author of the well-known Ṭibb-i Yūsufī). XIXth century."-- b. Slip of paper \'Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Meredith-Owens notes\' -- c. Slip of paper \'Counted for 1968/69 Annual Report\'.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 29 ; inscription in pencil on interior of upper cover "BL 6679"', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather (sheep) with band painted black ; Type III binding (without flap) ; upper and lower covers bear series of simple gold-painted rulings ; board linings in laid paper ; doublure hinges in same red leather ; red and white (cream to yellow) chevron endbands ; difficult to discern original sewing, appears to have been oversewn at some point ; in good condition with only some abrasion, wear, staining, and some negative draw in upper and lower covers (slightly warped).', 'Support: European laid paper (likely early to mid 19th century, see watermark), with chain lines running horizontally spaced roughly 27 mm. apart and "laid lines" forming a crosshatch with roughly 12-14 laid lines per cm. in the vertical and horizontal directions (resembling machine laid) ; essentially unburnished ; watermark "scrollwork" shield with eagle above castle "GIOR MAGNANI" (Compare Heawood 3748).', 'Decoration: Textual dividers in the form of inverted commas (three, etc.) appear occasionally; text rubricated with key words, overlining, and some headings in red.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq ; Persianate or Indian hand in a medium line ; virtually serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, some flattened, elongation descenders (rāʼ in particular), shaqq / sarkash of kāf sweeping dramatically upward (approach vertical) with a gentle curve, pointing for two and three dots in strokes or conjoined dots (rather than distinct dots).', 'Layout: Written in 12 lines per page ; frame-ruled with impression of ruling board evident.', 'Collation: ii, 7 IV (56), V (66), ii ; chiefly quaternions; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, partly in Arabic, reads: "تمت تمام شد كار من نظام شد وصلى الله على محمد واله اجمعين"', 'Explicit: "صاف كنند و بده درم قند شيرين كرده ده درم روغن زيت يا روغن گاو اضافه نموده ونيم گرم بياشامند و خوردن روغن وشير گاو افراط كردن دفع مضرت جميع زهر هه بكند تمت تمام شد"', 'Incipit: "رب يسر وتمم بالخير والظفرحمد نا محدود حكيمى را كه بقانون حكمت و كامل الصناعت رحمت دافع انواع امراض و رافع اصناف اعراض ست جلت الاؤه و عمت انعامه ودر ود بيعد رسولى را كه بجاده رسالت و زبده نبوت طبيب عيوب است و شفاء صدور هلت ست صلى الله عليه وسلم اجمعين الى يوم الدين اما بعد چنين گويد بنده ضعيف وكمينه نحيف المستفاد بعلم النافع المجيب يوسف ابن محمد ابن يوسف الطبيب ستر الله تعالى عيوبه وغفر ذنوبه كه چون بتوفيق حضرت فياض جل جلاله رساله علاج الامراض كه علاج هر مرض و دوائ هر عرض در وي مسطور ومذكور ست صورة ... اشاره فرمودند كه كتابى در شرح مشكلات و طريق ترتيب مركبات كه درين رساله مبين و بيان شده با زوائد فوائد علامات امراض و امارات اعراض و غيرها ... لا جرم عنان قلم بصورت اين مرقوم كه بجامع الفوائد موسوم ست مصروف گشته..."', 'Title from opening on fol.2a (p.3).', 'Ms. codex.', "Neat copy of Yūsufī's commentary on his versified treatise of therapeutics, ʻIlāj al-amrāz̤."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 85', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.443, copied by Ibrāhīm ibn Muṣṭafá ibn [?]. Transcription finished latter Shawwāl 1071 [June 1661].', 'Accompanying materials: Portion of a leaf from another manuscript (paginated pp.367-368).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 55. Jami al-rumuz."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in combed marbled paper (blue, pink, salmon, yellow, etc.) with spine and edges/turn-ins in red-brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; sewn in light brown thread, two stations ; in very poor condition with much abrasion, water and pest damage, lifting and losses of leather, delamination and losses of boards, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. (vertical) ; crown-star-crescent watermark (compare Heawood 1132) ; well-burnished ; much staining, some losses.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; some overlining and textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; small Turkish or Persian hand ; occasional right-sloping head serif on alif, lām, etc. ; slight effect of tilt to the left ; kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred ; mainly closed counters ; occasional effect of words descending to baseline.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', "Collation: VI+1 (13), 9 V(103), 2 IV (119), 10 V(219), II (223) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (begins with ۱ on 'title page' (p.15) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).", 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "على يد العبد الفقير المعترف بالعجز والتقصير افقر الخليقة ابراهيم بن مصطفى بن [...؟] اواخر شوال سنة احدى وسبعين والف من الهجرة النبوية على مهاجرها افضل الصلوة واتم التسليم ... امين"', 'Explicit: "فانه فكر مسائل الاخرين والمعتقل والغنم المذبوحة في اخر الكتاب ثم نبه على ما اختاره مما هو المعول عليه في الباب فهذا اوان فراغي ... فانك اكرم الاكرمين وارحم الراحمين والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي فضلنا بتعليم اصول مبسوط الجامع الكبير من الاحكام ... اما بعد فلما كان نظم منشور الفتاوى في انفع الامهات وجمع النوازل من اهم المهمات قام بذلك حلال المشكلات ذو التنقيح والتوضيح للمبهمات ... ثم وقفت لسواد جامع الرموز في ستين ونصف من الاعوام ..."', 'Title from inscription accompanying table of contents on added leaf (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the commentary on the Nuqāyah of Ṣadr al-Sharīʻah al-Aṣghar ʻUbayd Allāh ibn Masʻūd al-Maḥbūbī, an abridgment of the work of his grandfather Burhān al-Sharīʻah Maḥmūd ibn Ṣadr al-Sharīʻah al-Awwal's treatise on Ḥanafī law entitled Wiqāyat al-riwāyah."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 571', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. may suggest late early 16th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.1-2) -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 69" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (in salmon, blue, yellow, etc.) with red leather over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid European paper (watermark partially visible) ; sewn in dull pink thread, two stations, broken in many quires ; endbands virtually gone with trace of core at head ; overall in poor condition with flap fully detached, severe abrasion and staining (much of original marbling now lost), lifting and losses of leather, quires detaching from spine, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (20 in 25 mm., vertical), chain lines (horizontal) grouped in threes with 12-14 mm. between chains and 43-45 mm. between groups ; fairly sturdy and dense, well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Keywords and abbreviation symbols (mainly two teeth stroke) rubricated ; accents in red highlight other keywords ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; compact, elegant Turkish hand ; virtually serifless with marked tilt to the right, only slight effect of words descending to baseline, exaggerated elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, free assimilation of letters (e.g. point of final nūn assimilated with bowl, etc.).', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 15 V(150) ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and flyleaves).', 'Explicit: "فشهدت القابلة عن انفصاله حيا اجمعوا على انه يقبل شهادتها في حق الصلوة عليه وهل يقبل شهادتها في حق الارث قال ابو ح [اي ابو حنيفة] رحه [اي رحمه الله] لا تقبل وقالا تقبل"', 'Incipit: "يقول العبد الضعيف محمد بن محمود بن الحسن الاستروشني ... الحمد لله الذي بهرت حجته وظهرت على الخلائق محجته ... وبعد فان الناس في اهوائهم [مختلفون وفي طبائعهم وآرائهم] متباينون وعلى مقادير هممهم يكدحون ...ولما قعدت همتهم لحالتهم مع حسن آلتهم اردت ان احرز جملة من المسائل ... فانتقيت [منها] احكام الصغائر والصغار واودعتها في هذا الاوراق القصار ... وسميت هذا المجموع جامع الصغار وارجو ان يكون وسيلة لي لدفع الهوان والصغار ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.9.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Clear copy of a collection of legal decisions pertaining to children, lacking the final three masāʼil and khātimah. Contents listing at opening (pp.5-6).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 539', 'Origin: According to colophon on fol.468b, copied by Yaḥyá ibn ʻAlī al-Saqaṭī al-Mālaqī [?]. Copying completed ("najiza Kitāb al-Jāmiʻ al-wajīz...") 2nd Jumādá II 960 [ca. 16 May 1553].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. -- c. a number of scraps with doodles (pen trials?) inserted irregularly at mid-quire in the latter part of the codex (see fol.233b-234a, etc.).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 259" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip); front flyleaf in purple ink "۱٤".', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather with numerous repairs in brown and red leathers; Type II (with flap); present flap may be recycled or restoration, i.e. not original to covers; upper and lower covers carry gold-stamped central mandorla, pendants, and cornerpieces (compare Déroche class. OSd 8 and OSd 9); blind-stamped rosettes on fore-edge flap; blind-stamped geometric border on envelope flap; doublures of dark brown leather, upper doublure inscribed in black ink "احمد بن زين الدين"; interior of flap in woven cloth and marbled paper in green, blue, and yellow; pasted label on spine with shelfmark; in poor condition.', 'Support: primarily non-European (likely Persianate) laid paper with roughly 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical, indistinct) and no chain lines plainly visible; somewhat thin with many inclusions, cloudy formation, well-burnished, in several places quite worn; flyleaves are of a much later wove paper bearing embossed mark ("imitation watermark") in shape of tabula ansata (30 x 15 mm.) with inscription "اثر جديد عهد همايون" ; this same paper is used for the extensive page repairs and reinforcement throughout.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) on fol.1b, clearly damaged with only trace of upper panel remaining (in gold with red and blue accents, vegetal design); cartouche within lower panel of headpiece carries basmalah on a field of gold; gilt vegetal pattern extends over angular fields of blue and gold on either side of cartouche; bounded with red frame and gold border; frame in gold and blue on incipit page, red rule-borders thereafter throughout; textual dividers in the form of red discs on incipit page and facing page; text rubricated, with section headings, overlines, etc. in red as well as gold, blue, green, and violet; text of headings for rubrication written in margins, though occasionally cut off where page has been trimmed or worn.', 'Script: Naskh; clear hand; sans serif, occasional sweeping tails and descent of words to the baseline; different hand supplies text of fol.440b-445a.', 'Layout: Written in 31 lines per page.', 'Collation: ii, 2 V (20), IV (28), 10 V (128), VI (140), 2 V (160), IV (168), 13 V (298), V+1 (309), IV (317), 9 V (407), IV+1 (416), VI (428), I (430), II (434), VIII (450), IV (458), I (460), IV (469), ii; chiefly quinions; catchwords present; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, begins on folio following the incipit page with "٢", skips ١۶۶ and count off thereafter; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, referenced in cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular/trapezoidal, reads: "نجز كتاب الجامع الوجيز في الفتاوى بحمد الله وعونه في ثاني شهر جمادى الثاني في سنة ستين وتسعماية على يد الفقير الحقير المعترف بالعجز والتقصير الراجي رحمة ربه القدير الواثق بربه المعطي يحيى بن علي السفطي المالقي [؟] حامد الله تعالى وصلى الله على سيدنا ونبينا ومحمد وعلى اله وصحابه وسلم تسليما كثيرا"', 'Explicit: "وصمت بعارض فهو كالمريض المعتقل لسانه كذا في المحبوبي والله اعلم"', 'Incipit: "[حمدا لمن دعا الى دار] السلام بمحمد عليه افضل الصلاة والسلام شارع احكام الاسلام ... وبعد فهذا [مختصر] في بيان تعريفات الاحكام على وجه الاتقان والاحكام جمعه العبد محمد بن محمد الكردري ... كتاب الطهارة"', 'Title from colophon on fol.468b.', 'Ms. codex.', 'A compendium of Ḥanafī fatwas from various sources; copy in rough condition with extensive page repairs and some loss of text. See Isl. Ms. 70 for another ms. copy.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 70', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon. Paper, cover, etc. suggest 15th or 16th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Inserts carrying notes paginated (pp.37-38, pp.39-40).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 29. Decisions of al-Bazzazi."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red brown leather with spine in black leather (repair) ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; board linings in European laid paper ; upper cover bears central blind-tooled mandorla without pendants, but carrying diamond and interlace design within (compare Weisweiler 89) and decorative frame with roll-border and blind-stamped floral design ; lower cover bears blind-tooled ornament in the form of an eight-branched star filled with interlace (compare Weisweiler 99-101) ; and decorative frame nearly identical to that of upper cover ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; endbands in red and blue, quite damaged with repairs in cream thread sewn over ; in poor condition with severe abrasion (gashes), staining, splitting and lifting of leather at spine, delamination of boards, loss of flap, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with chain lines (vertical) grouped in threes, 35-42 mm. between the groups and 8-10 mm. between the chains ; laid lines spaced roughly 8 laid lines per cm.', 'Decoration: Section headings and keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of three discs and overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; small, neat Turkish or Persian hand ; virtually serifless ; quite rounded and freely ligatured ; mainly closed counters ; three dots supplied as inverted comma.', 'Layout: Written in 31 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: IV (8), VI (20), IV (28), 20 V(228), I (230), 12 V(350), IV (358) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords appear on the final folio of each quire, occasionally lacking or appearing more frequently ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and reverts to p.627 following p.686).', 'Explicit: "لا يعتبر لانه ناطق بحاله وان صمت بعارض فهو كالمريض المعتقل لسانه كذا في المحبوبي والله اعلم والحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على محمد واله اجمعين الطيبين الطاهرين"', 'Incipit: "حمدا لمن دعا الى دار السلام بمحمد عليه افضل الصلوة والسلام شارع احكام الاسلام ... وبعد فهذا مختصر في بيان تعريفات الاحكام على وجه الاتقان والاحكام جمعه العبد محمد بن محمد الكردري"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the compendium of Ḥanafī fatwas from various sources. Detailed table of contents precedes the text (fol.1b-fol.2b/pp.2-4). See Mich. Isl. Ms. 539 for another ms. copy of this work.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 105', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.971, copied by ʻAlī ibn Ḥusayn ibn Ḥasan al-Qalbī [al-Qulaybī?] al-Ḥanafī, perhaps assisted by those he names. Transcription finished ("qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min intisākh al-sharḥ al-sharīf...") 1 Muḥarram 1163 [ca. 11 December 1749]. As appears in authorial colophon on p.970, composition completed mid-Shaʻbān 1008 [February-March 1600] in Mecca.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 41. Commentary on Shamail."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; board linings in yellow laid paper ; flyleaves (made endpapers) in marbled paper (blue, orange, pink, green) ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped and gold-painted mandorla and pendants filled with vegetal decoration along with gold-painted border of tooled fillets framing a guilloché roll in a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in green and pink thread, two stations ; worked endbands in mustard and green, partially intact at head and tail ; quires from first half of codex are entirely detached ; spine has only partially retained leather covering ; second half of volume retains spine covering and intact sewing ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 25 mm. apart (horizontal) ; watermarks include lion statant guardant.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening of table of contents on p.4, consisting of rectangular piece carrying empty gold cartouche flanked by red and green floral motifs on fields of lilac surmounted by a semi-circular (dome) piece with red flowers and sea-green vegetal motif on a field of lilac ; fillets in red as border ; table of contents ruled in red ; splended illuminated headpiece (ʻunwan) at opening of text on p.20 ; consists of a w-shaped piece (with floral vegetal decoration in white, lilac, orange, etc. on fields of blue, gold, and sea-green) set in richly decorated well in red, gold, black, and maroon ; surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue, orange, red, and gold ; two rectangular panels sit below the well, the upper bears a cartouche carrying the basmalah flanked by panels with floral motif in red, copper, lilac on a field of gold, a design which continues in the lower rectangular panel ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by a frame consisting of a heavy gold band outlined by black and red fillets ; illuminated rosettes serve as textual dividers on the incipit and facing page ; elsewhere written area surrounded by red rule-border ; keywords rubricated ; overlining in red ; occasional textual dividers in the form of inverted commas.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq and naskh ; several hands ; naskh-nastaʻlīq sans serif with mainly closed counters, leftward tilt, and pointing in strokes rather than dots ; hand changes at p.115 to a neat naskh partially seriffed with serif on initial lām, ṭāʼ, etc., pointing in distinct dots, and open counters ; at p.211 changes to a heavier, bolder naskh, partially seriffed with rightward hook for serif on initial lām, leftward hooks for lām and alif in lām-alif, superscripting of final letters on line ; at p.251 returns to naskh-nastaʻlīq ; at p.323 changes to a naskh with slight leftward tilt, serifless, dot of final nūn assimilated with bowl, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots ; at p.512 returns to naskh-nastaʻlīq with heavy head-serifs for lām and freestanding alif, pointing in dots rather than strokes ; at p.929 returns to initial naskh-nastaʻlīq.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, III (6), VI+1 (19), 3 V(49), IV (57), 4 V(97), IV (105), 5 V(155), III (161), VI (173), VII (187), 2 V(207), IV+ 1 (216), 5 V(266), II (270), 5 V(320), II (324), 8 V(404), II (408), 5 V(458), III (464), V (474), IV (482), III (488), i ; mainly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during digitization, skips a page after p.974 and then repeats p.974).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "قد وقع فراغ من انتساخ الشرح الشريف بون الله الملك اللطيف على ايدي [؟] العباد الفقير الى رحمة العفو القدير علي بن حسين بن حسن القليبي [؟] الحنفي الحامل القران اوصله الله تعالى الى الرضوان و عاملهم الله باللطف و الغضران و سيد عثمان و خليل و ايوب و عمر و ابراهيم و سيد محمد اصلح الله تعالى حالهم و غفر الله لهم و لوالديهم امين بجاه النبي الامين يوم الخميس الاول من المحرم المحرم المعظم لشهور سنة ثلث و ستين و ماية و الف من الهجرة من له العز و الشرف الحمد لله و صلى الله على نبيه و مصطفاه و على اله و اصحابه الطيبين الطاهرين المتبعين بطريقته تم"', 'Explicit: "و الله سبحانه اعلم تحقيقا و بعونه يوجد العلم لغيره توفيقا و الحمد لله اولا و اخرا و الصلوة و السلام على صاحب المقام المحمود باطنا و ظاحرا"', 'Incipit: "الحمد الله خلق الخلق و الا خلاق و الا رزاق و الا فعال ... اما بعد فيقول افقر عباد الله الغني الباري علي بن سلطان محمد القاري لما كان موضوع علم الحديث ذات النبي ... و من احسن ما صنف في شمائل و اخلاقه صلى الله تعالى عليه و سلم كتاب الترمذي المختصر الجامع في سيره على وجه الوجيه الاتم ... احببت ان ادخل في زمرة الخادمين بشرح ذلك الكتاب ... و سميته جمع الوسائل في شرح الشمائل"', 'Title from opening on p.22.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of a commentary on al-Tirmidhī's Shamāʼil, a work on the characteristics of the Prophet. Description provided mainly by Sarah Mirza."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 208', 'Text rubricated; on pp. [1-48], words of Prophet in gold, notes laid in on slips of paper, commentary in hand of copyist. On p. [1], illuminated ʻunwān. Marginal commentaries, arranged in decorative shapes.', 'Text (not this copy) published.', 'On the life and personal characteristics of the prophet Muḥammad, commentary on a work by Muḥammad ibn ʻĪsá al-Tirmidhī called al-Shamāʼil al-Muḥammadīyah. Pp. [1-48] are apparently older. Pp. [55-313] may be from the same work and is much later in date. Copy defective (end missing).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 275', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; decoration, hand, etc. may suggest late 15th or even 16th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "423 T.D.M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" in pencil on interior of upper cover.', 'Binding: Marbled laid paper (ebru in light blue, pink, yellow, dark blue) with dark blue cloth over spine ; limp (no boards) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; reverse of paper is undecorated and untinted ; sewn in black thread, two stations ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion, staining, etc. ; textblock has certainly been trimmed (with attempt to avoid loss of catchwords) and carries traces of an envelope flap from a previous (if not the original) cover.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly indistinct) and no clear chain lines visible ; cloudy formation, sturdy, cream in color, well-burnished ; repairs to some leaves.', 'Decoration: Fine illuminated headpiece at opening on p.2, consisting of rectangular piece with cartouche in lapis lazuli carrying a form of the basmalah ("باسمه سبحانه و تعالى") flanked by rosette pendants in black and surrounded by elegant swirling floral vegetal composition in red, yellow, turquoise, pink, etc. on a gold ground with lapis accents, all surrounded by borders of gold and lapis bands and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in lapis ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by gold frame with outermost blue rule ; keywords and section headings rubricated ; two-teeth stroke abbreviation symbol (overlining keywords) in red ; numerous diagrams (addressing meters, etc.) in red and black ink (see p.25, 26, 27, 28, 62, 64, 65).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant hand ; serifless, with slight effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V-1 (9), 2 V(29), V+1 (40) ; quinions (first and last anomalous) ; p.64 left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "هر كس كه علم قافيه اين مقدار بداند او را كفايت باشد تم"', 'Incipit: "شکر و سپاس واجب التعظيمى را كه بتشريف نطق انسان را مشرف ساخت ... اما بعد اين مختصر يست از منشات وحيد تبريزى در علم عروض و قافيه و صنايع شعر ... و اين را جمع مختصر نام نهاد و بالله التوفيق ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the brief treatise on Persian prosody by Vaḥīd al-Dīn Tabrīzī (fl. 1417).'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Britannia (?); initials CIS in sans serif caps.', 'Contains tables of zodiacal signs and latitudes and longitudes of cities in many different countries.', 'Text rubricated; two copyists: pp. 7-17 (anonymous) and pp. 18-27 (named above).', 'ʻudhran li-annahu jalla man la yasʾhū lā siyyamā fī hādhihi al-azmān allatī kādat al-ʻulūm an tandarasa wa-kathara fīhā al-jahl wa-maʻ iʻtirāfī bi-annī lastu min ahl hādhā al-shaʾn wa-lākin al-ṭamaʻ fī al-ajr ajraʾanī ʻalayhi wa-al-rijāʾ fī thawābihi awdamanī ilayhi wa-bi-Allāh al-iʻtimād wa-bihi thiqatī tamma....', "Date and author/copyist's name in colophon: wa-aqūl wa-anā al-faqīr ... Aḥmad al-Khaṭīb ibn ʻAbd al-Laṭīf al-Khaṭīb ... qad tamma tabyīḍ hādhihi al-waraqāt fī yawm al-ithnayn yawm al-thāmin wa-al-ʻishrūn min Dhī al-Ḥijjah min sanat 1303 min hijrat al-nabī ... fa-al-marjūw miman aṭlaʻa ʻalá zallah aw ʻathar fīhā ʻalá hafwah an yuṣalliḥahā baʻd imʻān al-naẓr fīhi idh qīlakum muzayyiq ṣaḥīḥan li-ajl kawn fahmuhu qabiḥan fa-idhā taḥaqqaqa al-khaṭaʾ iltamas lī fīhā", 'Pp. 7-27. Bound with: [2] Badr al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad Sibṭ al-Māridīnī, Risālah fī al-ʻamal bi-al-rubʻ al-mujayyab, pp. [28-33]; [3] Astronomical tables, 1 leaf.', 'Title unidentified, in 20 bābs and a khātimah; copy defective: text begins at end of bāb 2.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 853', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.232, transcription of opening work completed 2 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1259 [ca. 24 December 1843] in Amīnʹpūr. As appears in colophon on p.424, final work copied by Muḥammad Bakhsh valad-i Muḥammad ʻAẓīm (likely the same copyist who executed Isl. Ms. 852 and Isl. Ms. 854) with transcription completed 15 Rajab 1244 [ca. 21 January 1829].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Sheet of ruled paper with notes in pencil "First part | \'Jenghis-name\' | Dated \'1259 which corresponds to 1888\' in Aminpur | Second part | Completed 1888 in same place. | Title not mentioned in colophon. Religious history" and in pen "PERSIAN SCRIPT" -- b. Card with typed description "K240 | 17301 | Indian [struck through] Persian [struck through] Mogul (?) manuscript book, leather binding with paper faces. | Amritsar." and in pen "PERSIAN SCRIPT" -- c. Photocopy of card with typed description "17301 | 865 Amritsor, India | 1 Indian manuscript book | Original no. K240. Leather binding; date 1888. | Univ., of Mich., Div. of Fine Arts | Walter Koelz, 1932-33 | March 19, 1934" -- d. Scrap with verses between pp.10-11 -- e. Torn scrap with notes between pp.64-65 -- f. Scrap torn from a page itself torn from a printed New Testament in Urdu (page appears at close of volume) between pp.92-93 -- g. Yet another torn scrap with prayer between pp.200-201 -- h. Yet another scrap with verses between pp.214-215 -- i. Page torn from a printed New Testament in Urdu (carries verses from the Gospel according to Luke) following p.424 at close of codex.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 2', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in now dull yellow laid paper with dark red leather over spine and board edges (paper faced, leather edged framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in light brown laid paper ; same dark red leather also used for inner hinges, to which textile spine lining has been glued and both sandwiched in paper ; upper and lower covers inner and outer triple-rule painted borders in silvery gray ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in light blue and cream, now further down on the spine, in fairly good condition though with some losses of thread and ends of rolled paper cores exposed, primaries sewn through spine lining ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of spine leather, upper joint split explosing spine lining and leather of inner hinge, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian) laid paper with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, indistinct, curving) and chain lines occasionally visible, quite cloudy formation, inclusions, fairly thick and sturdy though transluscent, only lightly burnished, light brown in color ; bit of blue thread / yarn visible in p.235.', 'Decoration: Section headings and keywords rubricated throughout ; text to be entered in red provided in margins.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant Indian hand in a thin to medium line ; in opening work, large and spacious, in final word smaller and more compact though appears to be the same hand ; characteristically serifless with gentle effect of words descending to baseline, inclination to the right, elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots, yāʼ always pointed, point of final nūn often set down within wide bowl ; naskh employed for transcription of some Arabic passages (see opening of final work on p.236).', 'Layout: Written in 25 (opening work) and 18 (final work) lines per page, with written area for opening work divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 14 IV(112), II (116), 12 IV(212), i ; almost exclusively quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of oblique strokes in black in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf and lower outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: [Jangnāmah] "Scribal," triangular, reads " ثم تم تمام شد نسخه متبرکه کتاب جنگ نامه از تصنیف حامد بتاریخ دویم دویم ماه دالحج بروز یکشنبه بوقت سپهر سنه ١٢٥٩ هجری سنه ١٨٩٨ در موضع امین پور تحریر یافت بحرمت النبی و اله الامجاد تمام تمام تم شد تم تم شد" ; [Durr al-majālis]"Scribal," triangular, reads "بید خط فقیر حقیر پر تقصیر مفتی محمد بخش ولد محمد عظیم غفر الله له بتاریخ پانزدهم ماه رجب المرجب بروز پنج شنبه سنه ۱۲۴۴ ۱۸۸۵ در ماه ماکیه در موضع امین \u200cپور در خانۀ دیوا سینگه هنابل تحریر یافت والله اعلم بالصواب تمام شد"', 'Incipit: [Jangnāmah] "لکھ لکھ حمد الاه نون جینی کل جهاں ..." ; [Durr al-majālis] "یا ایها الذین آمنوا صلوا علیه و سلموا تسلیما پیغامبری که خلعت در عالم علوی و سفلی بطفیل عظمت وجود اوست که مقر انبیا ولایت اوست و مقر اولیاء بهدایت اوست قوله تعالی فاتبعونی یحببکم الله زهی محبوب ازل که امان نامه عذاب امت را ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from colophon on p.232 and opening on p.236.', 'Ms. codex.', '3. p.236-p.424 : Durr al-majālis / Sayf Ẓafar ʻAlī Nawbahārī.', '2. p.233-p.235 : [originally left blank now some leaves carry elegiac poetic excerpts (مرثیه از نصیر الحق, etc.) and prayer].', '1. p.4-p. 232 : Jangnāmah / Hāmida Shāha Abbāsī.', 'Careful copy of a lengthy Panjabi poem on the martyrdom of Imām Ḥusayn and Durr al-majālis a Persian prose work on ethics. Extensive contributions to the cataloguing from Connie Bobroff, Arif Naushahi, Ali Rafi and Hossein Mottaghi. Further contributions to the physical description from Elizabeth Kunze.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Andrea Galvani of Pordenone. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 36 and no. 860.', 'Text rubricated; borders drawn in pencil.', 'Text (not this copy) published.', 'A summary of Ptolemy\'s Almagest, "Al-Farghānī\'s best-known and most influential work ... a comprehensive account of the elements of Ptolemaic astronomy that is entirely descriptive and nonmathematical." A. I. Sabra, "Al-Farghānī," Dictionary of Scientific Biography (New York, 1971), v. 4, pp. 541a-545a.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 660', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.91, opening work [al-Jawhar al-maḥbūk] copied by Muḥammad ibn ʻAlī al-Zardanāwī with transcription completed 2 Rajab 1141 [ca. 1 February 1729]. As appears in colophon on p.167, second work executed by the same copyist with transcription completed 1 Rajab 1141 [ca. 31 January 1729]. As appears in colophon on p.253, transcription of following work [al-Alfīyah] executed by the same copyist with transcription completed Jumādá II 1141 [January 1729]. As appears in preceding authorial colophon on p.253, composition completed in Cairo seemingly in the year 1131 [1718 or 19] as represented in the numerical value of the phrase "انسالها فن من البكرية".', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 79" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in block-printed paper (mainly in pink and dark lavender with repeating 7-pointed sun or star motif overlaid with orange-red dots) with light brown leather over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins (framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; sewn in grey thread, two stations ; overall in somewhat poor condition with upper board cracked, significant abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather (particularly on upper board and spine), cover detaching at spine, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 13 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 20-21 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of grapes (raisin) with name and crown above (see p.10, 11, etc.), thin though sturdy, well-burnished ; ink burn.', 'Decoration: Section headings rubricated ; text of written area (and divided columns) surrounded by red rule-border ; red pigment on edges of text block.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, medium Egyptian [?] hand ; irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on many ascenders (even occasional free-standing alif), marked effect of tilt to the left, adhering fairly closely to the baseline, pointing (two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed, mainly curvilinear descenders ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page (with written area divided to two columns to set off verses) ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 4 V(40), III (46), 3 V(76), IV (84), 3 V(114), VI (126), I (128) ; chiefly quinions ; final leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: [Kitāb al-Jawhar al-maḥbūk] "Scribal," triangular, reads "تم الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب وكان الفراغ منه يوم الاثنين ثاني يوم من شهر رجب المبارك سنة ١١٤١ على يد محمد بن علي الزردناوي اللهم اغفر له ولوالديه ولمشايخه ولاخوانه في الله تعالى ولكافة المسلمين اجمعين امين امين امين" ; [Minhāj al-ʻārif al-muttaqī ] "Scribal," triangular, reads "وكان الفراغ منها في غرة رجب الحر المبارك من شهور سنة ١١۴۱ على يد كاتبها محمد بن علي الزردناوي اللهم اغفر له ولوالديه ولمشايخه ولاخوانه في الله تعالى احياء وامواتا ولكل المسلمين امين امين امين" ; [Alfīyat al-taṣawwuf] "Scribal," triangular, reads "وكان الفراغ منها يوم الاحد على يد كاتبها محمد بن علي الزردناوي اللهم اغفر له ولوالديه ولمشايخه ولمؤلفها ولكل المسلمين اجمعين امين امين امين في جماد الثاني سنة ١١۴۱"', 'Explicit: [Kitāb al-Jawhar al-maḥbūk] "ولا تخيب جميل الظن فيك ولا تقطع عوائدك الحسنى في النعم" ; [Minhāj al-ʻārif al-muttaqī ] "ولي ولخلق الله اجمع ابتقي من الله رضوانا وعونا موفقا" ; [Alfīyat al-taṣawwuf] "الخاتمة وحق ان اختم ذي الالفية فقد غدت كافية وفيه والحمد للموصوف بالمفاخر في اول وواسط واخر ... وعدة الابيات روض زاهر ۱۲۱۹ من حل فيه فهو طاهر وقد اتت تاريخها بكرية انسالها فن من البكرية واسأل الله بنون والقلم يغفر لي ما قد طغا به القلم .. واغفر لكل مسلم ومسلمة ما نفس صب للقضاء مسلمه وما صباح بالضياء معلم وما نهي معلما ومعلم تم بياضها بمصر القاهرة لا برحت لمن يشين قاهرة"', 'Incipit: [Kitāb al-Jawhar al-maḥbūk] "قال الفقير الى مولاه ذي الكرم علوان ذو الذنب والعصيان والحرم بسم الله اتى فتحي ومختتمي والحمد لله ربي بارئ النسم ..." ; [Minhāj al-ʻārif al-muttaqī ] "اما بعد فان الاسباب التي يتقرب بها الى الله تعالى ثلاثة اعتقاد وعلم وعمل ... نظمت هذه القصيدة ليهتدي بها السالك في طريقه ... وقد سميتها منهاج العارف المتقي ومعراج السالك المرتقي ... وهذه القصيدة عدتها الف بيت وسبعة ابيات رقى بي مقاما من فنائي الى البقا فما لي قصد في نعيم ولا شقا ..." ; [Kitāb al-Alfīyah fī ʻilm al-taṣawwuf] "قال الفقير للغني مصطفى نجل ابي بكر وسبط المصطفى الحمد لله العلي الشان ما شان اهل الحب يوما شاني حمدا به نفوز بالاحسان ونرتقي منابر الاحسان ... وبعد فاعلم ايها المريد حباك من افضاله المريد ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '7. p.254-p.256 : [originally left blank, now carry a few assorted excerpts].', '6. p.170-p.253 : Kitāb al-Alfīyah fī ʻilm al-taṣawwuf / Muṣṭafá ibn Kamāl al-Dīn al-Bakrī al-Khalwatī.', '5. p.169 : [contents listing].', '4. p.168 : [blank].', '3. p.94-p.167 : Minhāj al-ʻārif [al-ʻābid] al-muttaqī wa-miʻrāj al-sālik al-murtaqī / ʻAlwān ibn ʻAlī ibn ʻAṭīyah al-Haytī al-Ḥamawī.', '2. p.92-p.93 : [blank].', '1. p.1-p.91: Kitāb al-Jawhar al-maḥbūk bi-al-ḥallī al-masbūk fī ṭarīqat al-sulūk / ʻAlwān ibn ʻAlī ibn ʻAṭīyah al-Haytī al-Ḥamawī.', "Fine copy of two Ṣūfī poems on moral corruption and proper conduct, al-Jawhar al-maḥbūk bi-al-ḥaly al-masbūk fī ṭarīqat al-sulūk and Minhāj al-ʻārif [al-ʻābid] al-muttaqī wa-miʻrāj al-sālik al-murtaqī, by ʻAlwān ibn ʻAlī ibn ʻAṭīyah al-Haytī al-Ḥamawī (d.1530) followed by Muṣṭafá ibn Kamāl al-Dīn al-Bakrī al-Khalwatī's (d.1749) Alfīyah, a rajaz poem in 1219 verses on Ṣūfī principles."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 63', 'Origin: Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.445a (p.891), copied by Muṣṭafá ibn Sayyidī [Sīdī?] ibn Maḥmūd. Transcription finished ("wa-kāna al-farāgh min hādhihi al-nuskhah al-mubārakah...") 15 Rabīʻ II 985 [ca. 2 July 1577].', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 47. Commentary on Kuduri."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in green to brown leather (spine, interior of fore-edge flap, doublure hinges and turn-ins in red leather) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in paper (pink-tinted) ; upper and lower covers bear stamped (with red leather recessed onlays) and gold-painted central mandorla with pendants and corner pieces (vegetal design, remotely similar to Déroche class. OAi 10) with stamped and gold-painted roll border consisting of a series of s-shaped stamps ; design carries on to envelope flap where it is much better preserved ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations ; chevron endbands in red and white, detaching and nearly lost ; in poor condition with flap completely detached, much abrasion of cover designs, lifting of leather, delamination of boards, some leather burn, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 12 laid lines per cm. and chain lines (horizontal) spaced roughly 27 mm. apart ; heavy and well-burnished ; angel with hand lifted watermark ; many loose quires.', 'Decoration: Frame consisting of gold band with black fillets surrounds written area on incipit and facing page ; elsewhere written area surrounded by simple rule-border in two red fillets ; text rubricated with section headings, keywords, overlining, etc. in red ; words for rubrication noted in margins.', 'Script: Naskh ; neat Ottoman Turkish hand ; partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serif mainly on lām, occasionally ṭāʼ and other letters bearing vertical shafts, free-standing alif usually left serifless ; effect of slight tilt to the left ; often closed counters ; dot of final nūn often assimilated with bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iv, V-1 (9), 43 V(439), V-1 (448) ; chiefly quinions ; a few lines on p.685 are left blank, unmarked ; last three leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic, numerals, (begins with ۱ on fol.2, mistakenly skips ٤۲٤) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes some flyleaves, mistakenly skips two pages between pp.441-442).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب وقد وقع الفراغ عن يد عبد الضعيف النخيف المحتاج الى رحمة الله تعالى مصطفى بن سيدي بن محمود غفر الله له ولوالديه ولاستاذيه ولجميع المؤمنين والمؤمنات والمسلمين والمسلمات برحمتك يا ارحم الراحمين وكان الفراغ من هذه النسخة المباركة في اليوم الخامس عشر في شهر ربيع الاخر من شهور سنة خمس وثمانين وتسعمائة"', 'Explicit: "واذا اسقطت من نصيب الزوج وهو ثلثة وعشرون ثلثة وهو سبعة وثلثان بقي خمسة عشر وثلث وهو نصيبه من التركة وهكذا كل وارث والله اعلم بالصواب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله ولا حول ولا قوة وما توفيقي الا بالله ... وبعد فهذا شرح لمختصر القدوري وجمعته بالفاظ مختصرة وعباراة [عبارات] ظاهرة يشمل على كثير من المعاني والمذاكرة اوضحته لزوم الافهام القاصرة والهمم المتقاصرة وسميته الجوهرة المنيرة [النيرة؟] واستعنت بمن له الحمد في الاولى والاخرة سبحانه وهو اهل التقوى واهل المغفرة قال الامام ابو الحسن رحمه الله كتاب الطهارة"', 'Title from opening on fol.1b (p.6).', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of al-Jawharah al-nayyirah, the commentary by Abū Bakr ibn al-Ḥaddād al-ʻAbbādī on al-Qudūrī's (d.1037) Mukhtaṣar, the celebrated Ḥanafī legal manual."])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: large letters G(?).C.C.', 'Contains a table of star locations.', 'In Maghribī script.', 'Text rubricated in four colors; marginal corrections, notes, and finding aids in hand of copyist and others (some in pencil).', 'Date of composition and copying in colophon: qāla muʾallifuhā ... intahá taʾlīf hādhihi al-risālah fī sanat 875 [i.e. 1470 or 1] ... wa-kāna al-farāgh min nashkhihā fī laylat al-tāsiʻ min shahr Dhī al-Ḥijjah ʻām 1258 thamāniyah wa-khamsūn wa-miʾatayn wa-alf [i.e. 11 January 1843].', 'Pp. [1-175]. Bound with: Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad ibn al-ʻAṭṭār, Kashf al-qināʻ fī rasm al-arbāʻ, pp. [182-208].', 'Commentary and elaboration upon the author\'s Kashf al-qināʻ fī rasm al-arbāʻ, "a treatise on different kinds of quadrants in 2 qisms of 10 + 9 faṣls, mentioning those who invented them." No other copies of this work are known. David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), pp. 74-75.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 453', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.512, copied by Muʼmin ibn Khwājah ibn Mūsá ( Mümin bin Hoca bin Musa ) with transcription completed mid-Ramaḍān 851 [November 1447] in Sāmsūn [?] (i.e. Samsun ?).', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (for all four volumes, now Isl. Ms. 453, 454, 455, 456) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- c. Slip with title and inventory number in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (paginated pp.47-48).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 344a I" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather with red leather repairs to spine and fore edge flap (now lost) ; Type II binding (with flap, now lost) ; doublures (board linings) in an elegant marbled paper (mainly in lavender, red, and dark blue over white) with hinges in shell marbled paper (in blue, pink and yellow) ; upper and lower covers carry large blind-stamped (with tan leather recessed onlay) mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. NA 6) with gold-painted accents and tooled pendants (a cluster of rosette stamps), as well as tooled and gold-painted border ; sewn in red and yellow thread, four stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and light yellow (tail, fair condition) and red and yellow (head, quite good condition) overall in poor condition with significant abrasion and staining, flap lost, lifting and losses of leather (especially at board edges), upper cover detaching, etc. ; repairs in red leather (also damaged).', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines grouped in threes with 8-10 mm. between chains and 40-45 mm. between groups ; well-burnished, thick and sturdy, dark cream to beige in color.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas or hāʼ in red ; overlining in orange-red.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant, compact Turkish hand with Persianate features in a medium line ; serifless with effect of tilt to the left (occasionally to the right), slight effect of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), rounded but with more rectilinear descenders, pointing mainly in strokes rather than distinct dots, some elongation of horizontal strokes, freely ligatured, hāʼ mudghamah looking like two inverted commas ; partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V-1 (9), 24 V(249), II+1 (254), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present but occasionally cut off ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "تم الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب وقد وقع الفراغ من تحرير هذه النسخة الشريفة في بلد سامسون [؟] بحضرت مولانا حاجى الدين ... على يد العبد الضعيف النحيف المذنب المحتاج الراجي الى رحمة ربه اللطيف مؤمن بن خواجه بن موسى غفر الله له ولوالديه ... وقت الضحى في يوم الخميس في واسط شهر رمضان المبارك تاريخ سنه احد وخمسون وثمانمائة من هجرة النبوية ... والله اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب"', 'Explicit: "وانه لغفور رحيم قال عطا سريع العقاب لاعدائه غفور لاوليائه رحيم بهم"', 'Incipit: "قال شيخنا الامام الاجل السيد محي السنة ناصر الحديث ... الحمد لله ذي العظمة والكبرياء والعزة والبقاء والرفقة والعلاء ... اما بعد فان الله جل ذكره ارسل رسوله صلعم بالهدى وديي الحق رحمة للعالمين"', "Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', "First of four volumes of al-Baghawī's commentary on the Qurʼān, from Sūrat al-Fātiḥah (1) to Sūrat al-Anʻām (6) ; contents listing on 'title page' (p.3)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 463 v.5', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.512, transcription completed in the second tenth of Jumādá I 958 [1551] or 998 [1590]. The second numeral of the date may have been tampered with as it appears that the numeral ٥ covers what may be a numeral ٩ ; it is conceivable that the copyist mistakenly repeated the initial numeral ٩ and then made a correction, or that another person made this change.', 'Accompanying materials: Scrap of paper paginated pp.431-432.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 91 V" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in Isl. Ms. 463 v.2).', 'Binding: Pasteboards now covered in green-blue paper-backed cloth over dark brown leather with tan leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap though envelop flap now lost) ; board linings in dull yellow paper ; sewn in dark pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in cream and dull pink, damaged ; overall in poor condition with envelope flap lost, lifting and losses of cloth (particularly at spine), abrasion, staining, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 32 mm. apart (horizontal), and anchor in circle with star above watermark (see p.6, etc.) ; crisp and sturdy, well-burnished to glossy ; some staining.', 'Decoration: Section headings and keywords rubricated ; written area surrounded by red rule-border.', "Script: Naskh ; a fine Eastern Turkish (Anatolian) or 'Syrian' hand ; serifless with effect of tilt to the right, exaggerated thickness and elongation of horizontal strokes, many closed counters, pointing mainly in distinct dots, some free assimilation of letters, kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred (even final kāf), final alif curves to the right.", 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 2 V(20), IV (28), 6 V(88), IV+1 (97), 15 V(247), IV (255), II+1 (260), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and insert, skips two pages each between pp.281-282 and pp.285-286).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "ووقع الفراغ من هذا الجلد يوم السبت المبارك في العشر الثاني من جمادى الاول سنة ۹٥٨"', 'Explicit: "مثل صوت ما يركز في الارض تم ما يتعلق بسورة مريم يتلوه سورة طه عليه السلام"', 'Incipit: "سورة ابراهيم عليه السلام مكية وهي احدى وخمسون اية قوله هو كتاب اما على تقدير ان يكون الر اسما للسورة ويكون التقدير هذه الر ثم استأنف قوله هو كتاب اشارة الى فخامة شأنها وعظم قدره ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy of the fifth of seven volumes (v.1 and v.4 now lacking) of the commentary by Shaykhʻzādah Muḥammad ibn Muṣṭafá al-Qūjawī (d.1544 or 5) upon al-Bayḍāwī's commentary on the Qurʼān, Anwār al-tanzīl wa-asrār al-taʼwīl, covering Sūrat Ibrāhīm (14) through Sūrat Maryam (19). Contents listing on blank opening leaf of first quire (p.1)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 463 v.7', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest late 16th century ; many replacements likely 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Scrap carrying "VII" in red pencil paginated pp.179-180.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label (see cloth once covering spine tucked inside upper cover), "IL 91 VII" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in Isl. Ms. 463 v.2).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather with spine in tan leather, later covered in green-blue paper-backed cloth (retained on upper cover and flap, cloth once covering spine tucked inside upper cover) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in dull yellow paper ; upper (now covered by cloth) and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OSd 8) and border in tooled rules with rosette stamp accents ; sewnin dark pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in cream and dull pink, fairly good condition ; overall in poor condition with lifting and losses of cloth and leather, abrasion, staining, etc.', "Support: European laid paper of two main types ; opening (and closing, from p.667) type with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 30 mm. apart (horizontal), and bull's head watermark (see p.8, 14, etc.), sturdy and very well burnished to glossy ; second main type (from p.443, etc.) with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27-28 mm. apart (horizontal), and anchor in circle with leaf above watermark (see p.458, 459, etc.) ; replacements in several other types including type with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22 mm. apart (horizontal), and crown above grapes (raisin) watermark, beige to light-brown in color (see pp.461-496).", 'Decoration: Section headings and some abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke marking keywords) rubricated ; overlining in red ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by gold frame, elsewhere (through p.442 and again from p.667) written area surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Naskh with some influence of nastaʻlīq ; two main clear Turkish hands (central replacements in several other hands) ; opening and closing hand virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), closed and open counters, rounded but with a mix of curvilinear and rectilinear descenders, pointing (of two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots ; next main hand (see p.443, 529, etc.) a clear, bold naskh, mainly serifless with marked effect of inclination to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots, adhering to baseline, point of fina l nūn set above or assimilated with bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 27 and 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 11 V(110), 4 (114), V (124), I+1 (127), II (131), 9 V(221), 7 (228), I (230), 4 (234), V (244), 4 (248), V (258), 6 (264), 6 V(324), V-1 (333), 4 V(373), II+2 (379) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert and skips two pages between pp.235-236).', 'Explicit: "سبحان ربك رب العزة عما يصفون وسلام على المرسلين والحمد لله رب العالمين تمت الحواشي المعلقة كل مغلقات انوار التنزيل واسرار التأويل الذي صنفه الامام العلامة ... عبد الله بن ابي القاسم علي بن عمر البيضاوي تغمده الله تعالى برحمته ورضوانه واسكنه اعلى جنانه تم"', 'Incipit: "سورة ق مكية بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الحمد لله المنعم المنان والصلوة والسلام على سيد من ارسل لهدايته نوع الانسان ... قوله الكلام فيه كما قر في ص والقرآن ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', "Careful copy of the last of seven volumes (v.1 and v.4 now lacking) of the commentary by Shaykhʻzādah Muḥammad ibn Muṣṭafá al-Qūjawī (d.1544 or 5) upon al-Bayḍāwī's commentary on the Qurʼān, Anwār al-tanzīl wa-asrār al-taʼwīl, covering Sūrat Qāf (50) through Sūrat al-Nās (114). Contents listing on 'title page' (p.3)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 463 v.6', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. suggest late 16th and 17th century.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and label on fore edge flap, "IL 91 VI" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in Isl. Ms. 463 v.2).', 'Binding: Pasteboards now covered in green-blue paper-backed cloth over dark brown leather with tan leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; traces of stamped mandorlas on upper and lower covers (now covered by cloth) ; board linings in dull yellow paper ; sewn in dark pink thread, two stations, sewing in final quires gone ; worked chevron endbands in cream and dull pink, fairly good condition ; ill-fitting with flap too small ; overall in poor condition with lifting and losses of cloth, abrasion, staining, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of four main types ; opening type (also appearing elsewhere in codex) with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27-28 mm. apart (horizontal), and anchor in circle with star above watermark (see p.16, 17, etc.), sturdy though crisp, well-burnished to glossy ; next type (second quire and elsewhere) with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), and angel in circle with leaf above watermark (see p.38, 39, etc.) ; next type (pp.253-294) with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27 mm. apart (horizontal), and crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.262, 263, etc.) ; still another type (from p.601) with 12-13 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 14-32 mm. apart (horizontal), and three circles watermark, quite thin and transluscent, very well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Some keywords rubricated or accent with red ink ; written area surrounded by red rule-border.', "Script: Naskh and naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) ; at least four clear Turkish hands ; opening and main hand (appearing multiple places throughout codex), a serifless naskh, rounded with inclination to the left, some elongation of horizontal strokes (occasionally more exaggerated), pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, point of final nūn sitting above or assimilated with bowl, extensively vocalized ; next hand (from p.29 and elsewhere) a naskh showing influence of nastaʻlīq, serifless with long, fluid ascenders, marked effect of words descending to baseline and of inclination to the left, some elongation of 'horizontal' strokes and sharp, flat descenders (mainly rāʼ, wāw, dhāl, etc.), free assimilation of letters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots ; from pp.253-294 still another naskh approaching nastaʻlīq (talik), partially seriffed with inclination to the right, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, point of final nūn set above or assimilated with bowl ; from p.601 still another naskh approaching nastaʻlīq (talik), bold, compact and serifless with inclination to the right, elongation of horizontal strokes, quite rounded with free assimilation of letters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots ; incipit page (p.6) in a different hand.", 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, V+2 (12), 4 V(52), V+1 (63), 5 V(113), 2 V+1(135), V (145), V-1 (154), 14 V(294), 4 (298), 24 (538), iii ; chiefly quinions ; two quires (pp.911-950) numbered ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and mistakenly skips from p.769 to p.780, thereafter off by ten pages).', 'Explicit: "قوله تمنون عليكم ان اسملوا او الباقون بالحطاب نظرا الى قوله قل لا تمنوا على اسلامكم ويتلوه سورة القاف"', 'Incipit: "سورة طه مكية وهي مائة واربع وثلثون اية قوله لاستعلائه ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', "Careful copy of the sixth of seven volumes (v.1 and v.4 now lacking) of the commentary by Shaykhʻzādah Muḥammad ibn Muṣṭafá al-Qūjawī (d.1544 or 5) upon al-Bayḍāwī's commentary on the Qurʼān, Anwār al-tanzīl wa-asrār al-taʼwīl, covering Sūrat Ṭāhā (20) through Sūrat al-Ḥujurāt (49)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 463 v.3', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. suggest late 16th century (around 1580 as with sections of Isl. Ms. 463 v.2 copied on similar anchor in circle marked paper).', 'Accompanying materials: Insert with glosses paginated pp.15-16.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, "IL 91 III" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in Isl. Ms. 463 v.2).', 'Binding: Pasteboards now covered in green-blue paper-backed cloth over dark brown leather with tan leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; lower cover carries traces of scalloped mandorla now covered by cloth ; board linings in dull yellow paper ; sewn in dark pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in cream and dull pink, good condition ; overall in poor condition with lifting and losses of cloth (particularly at spine), abrasion, staining, some curvature and spine slant, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of two main types ; opening type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (horizontal), and anchor in circle with star above watermark (see p.32, etc.), sturdy, fairly thick and crisp, well-burnished ; another type (from p.323 to close) with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 29-30 mm. apart (horizontal), crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.338, 334, etc.), and "ZA" under trefoil countermark (see p.336, etc.), well-burnished, fairly thick and sturdy.', 'Decoration: Keywords, abbreviation symbols (mainly two teeth stroke above notable words), and section headings rubricated ; overlining in red ; occasional textual dividers in the form of red discs.', "Script: Naskh and nastaʻlīq (talik) ; at least four Turkish / 'Syrian' hands ; opening hand through p.119 compact and virtually serifless with slight effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots ; pp.120-322 in a smaller, more compact hand, virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, quite freely ligatured with pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots ; p.323 to close in an elegant nastaʻlīq (talik) and a sweeping naskh.", 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page.', 'Collation: iii, IV (8), III (14), 4 V(54), I (56), 9 V(146), VI (158), II (162), 8 V(242), IV (250), ii ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals from p.323 (Sūrat al-Anʻām) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and insert with glosses).', 'Explicit: "نزلت مرة اخرى جملة واحدة صح ان يقال انها نزلت جملة واحدة والله اعلم تمت سورة الانعام بعون الله الملك العلام ولي الانعام الحمد لله وحده والصلوة والسلام على من لا نبي بعده وعلى آله واصحابه اجمعين والحمد لله رب العالمين تم"', 'Incipit: "الكافرون اهل الحرب لقوله تعا انما جزاء الذين يحاربون الله ورسوله ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy of the third of seven volumes (v.1 and v.4 now lacking) of the commentary by Shaykhʻzādah Muḥammad ibn Muṣṭafá al-Qūjawī (d.1544 or 5) upon al-Bayḍāwī's commentary on the Qurʼān, Anwār al-tanzīl wa-asrār al-taʼwīl, covering Sūrat Āl ʻUmrān (3) through Sūrat al-Anʻām (6)."])

en: (count: ["Origin: Possibly author's working copy, with many notes in marginalia. This copy finished 993/1585.", 'Decoration: Titles and place names in red and gold ink. Central text on each page is framed in simple blue and gold border. Initial page features an elaborite design in blue, gold, orange, and green paint. Incidental maps and diagrams in margins are usually executed in blue ink. Map of Mediterranean world laid in page 22. A single page of notes with diagram depicting the kaʻbah as the center of the world along with many notes is laid into this codex.', 'Script: Text written in naskh script with black ink.', 'Binding: Leather bound codex with tooling on upper and lower covers as well as envelope flap; gold paint on medalions.', "Title from rubricated inscription on opening leaf (p.3) and inscription on 'title page' (p.7).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Geographical work ; geographical dictionary.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 455', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.359, copied by Niẓām ibn Ḥuwayān [?] al-Bīshkīnī (Pīshkīnī or Bīshgīnī, likely a reference to the Pīshkīnids of Ahar), with transcription completed in Ṣafar 776 [July-August 1374].', 'Accompanying materials: Two inventory cataloguing slips in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From front flyleaf and spine label, "IL 344a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in Isl. Ms. 453).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather with red leather repairs to spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap, now fully detached) ; doublures (board linings) in an elegant marbled paper (mainly in pink, dark blue, and brown) ; upper and lower covers carry large blind-stamped (with tan leather recessed onlay) mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OAi 6) with gold-painted accents and tooled pendants (a cluster of rosette stamps), as well as tooled and gold-painted border ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; endbands in light blue and light pink, damaged, exposing brown leather of core ; overall in quite poor condition with spine split through (at p.286), lower cover detached, flap fully detached, some abrasion and lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; housed in box for protection ; repairs in red leather (also damaged).', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and occasional chain lines visible roughly 20 mm. apart (possibly in large group) ; well-burnished and fairly smooth, dark cream in color, fairly crisp, cloudy formation ; back flyleaves in European laid paper with crown above grapes (raisin) watermark.', 'Decoration: Keywords and vocalization rubricated ; Qurʼānic passages being commented upon overlined in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant, compact Persianate hand ; mainly serifless (though rightward serif on shaqq of kāf) with slight effect of tilt to the right, especially long and vertical free-standing alifs, contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, quite rounded with curvilinear descenders (some sweeping), many closed counters, casual pointing mainly in distinct dots, final nūn quite round with dot set down in.', 'Layout: Written in 24 lines per page.', 'Collation: 7 IV (56), 2 IV-1 (70), 13 IV 174), II+1 (179), ii ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present (though often obscured by repairs) ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تمت جلد الثالث من كتاب معالم التنزيل في تفسير القرآن من تصنيف الامام الحافظ محيي السنة ركن الاسلام ابي محمد الحسين بن مسعود الفرا البغوي قدس الله روحه ... بحمد الله وحسن افضاله والصلوة والسلام على محمد ... على يد عبد الضعيف المذنب المحتاج الى رحمة الله تعالى نظام بن حويان البيشكيني غفر الله له ولوالديه في شهر المبارك صفر سنه ست وسبمعين وسبعمائة"', 'Explicit: "وكان الله غفورا رحيما للمؤمنين والمؤمنات والله اعلم بالصواب"', 'Incipit: "كهيعص قرأ ابو عمرو بكسر الهاء وفتح الياء ..."', 'Title from colophon on p.359.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Third of four volumes of al-Baghawī’s commentary on the Qurʼān, from Sūrat Maryam (19) to Sūrat al-Aḥzāb (33) ; contents listing on opening leaf (p.4).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 5 v.2', 'Origin: Lacks a colophon. Paper would suggest 14th to 15th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Several inserted slips: between fol.68-69 (p.136-7) additional traditions (with rubricated قوله) on European paper -- between fol.109-110 (p.218-9) possible study note written on European paper torn from another ms. -- between fol.189-190 (p.378-9) insert on European paper, different hand/ink, tipped in.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "British Museum, London. No. 48. Zamakhshari\'s Commentary on Kuran VII - XXXII."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in European paper over dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now missing) ; endbands in yellow and blue ; in fair condition with spine slant (codex severely cocked), abrasions on the edges, front cover partially detached, missing foreedge and envelope flap, and some insect damage.', "Support: non-European (likely Persian and Arab) laid paper ; main type a Persian (?) laid paper, perhaps 14th century with laid lines running horizontally spaced roughly 7-8 laid lines per cm., chain lines as sporadic short lengths or perhaps paired in some leaves, lightly sized and burnished, some sagging of laid lines, many inclusions, and undissolved fibers ; second type (from hand change on) likely Arab laid paper of 15th century with chain lines grouped in threes, 9-10 mm. between the chain lines of each group and roughly 48 mm. between the groups (see fol.304), laid lines running horizontally spaced roughly 8 laid lines per cm., lightly burnished ; front flyleaf/pastedown in European laid paper with laid lines running horizontally spaced 7 laid lines per cm. chain lines running vertically spaced evenly about 28 mm. apart with crown, star, crescent watermark ; back flyleaf/pastedown in European laid paper with laid lines running horizontally spaced roughly 11 laid lines per cm. and watermark with serpent on cross above bull's head with eyes, ears, and horns (compare Heawood, 3784, pl. 508) ; some moisture and insect damage, obstructing text.", 'Decoration: Text rubricated with occasional headings, overlinings, etc. in red ; ink burn throughout.', 'Script: Naskh ; two main hands, with fol.235b (p.470) and following supplied in second hand; first a Transoxanian or Persian hand, virtually serifless, with slight effect of words descending to baseline and mainly closed counters ; second a Persian or Turkish hand, quite rounded with mainly closed counters, mainly sans serif but with occasional right sloping head-serif on lām, ṭāʼ, etc. ; headings in larger heavier script approaching tawqīʻ, quite consistent use of the lām alif al-mukhaffafah ; occasionally vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 27-30 lines per page (most often 29) ; frame-ruled with impression of ruling board evident.', 'Collation: i, III (6), 18 V (186), III (192), III+1 (199), 12 V (319), i ; chiefly quinions ; quire numbering in the form of "juzʼ" with an underlined number, appearing at the beginning of the quire ; however, many quires are not marked (perhaps cut off in trimming) and some juzʼ marks do not correspond to the beginning of the quires ; appears to be lacking matter at close where it cuts off abruptly (see catchword) ; fols. 192a-194a (p.383-387) blank and unmarked, Surat Maryam (19) is started on p.382, but continues for only half a page then restarts on p. 388 ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals with many mistakes, repaginated during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "ويجوز ان يخاطب به كل احد كما تقول فلان لئيم ان اكرمته اهانك وان احسنت اليه"', 'Incipit: "سورة الاعراف مكية غير ثمان ايات و[هي قوله ا]سئلهم عن القرية الى [قوله] واذ نتقنا [الجبل فوقهم] وهي مائتان وخمس ايات بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم كتاب خبر مبتدا محذوف اي هو كتاب وانزل اليك صفة له"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from spine title.', 'Ms. codex.', "An odd second volume of al-Zamakhsharī's celebrated commentary on the Qurʼān treating Sūrat al-Aʻrāf (7) through verse 12 of Sūrat al-Sajdah (32) [see Isl. Ms. 5 v.1 for a first odd volume treating Sūrahs 1-25]. Description provided by Alison Vacca."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 463 v.2', 'Origin: As appears at close on p.454, opening section (close of Sūrat al-Baqarah) dated 987 [1579 or 80]. Further sections on anchor in circle marked paper likely contemporary ; sections on eagle "GFA" marked paper suggest 19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (for the set as extant, this and Isl. Ms. 463 v.3, Isl. Ms. 463 v.5, Isl. Ms. 463 v.6 and Isl. Ms. 463 v.7) -- b. Scrap of grid paper with portion of drawing and notes (between pp.454-455).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, "IL 91 II" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards now covered in dull yellow paper and green-blue paper-backed cloth with dark olive green leather over spine ; Type II binding (originally with flap, though now lost) ; board linings in brown wove paper ; sewn in dark pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in cream or light yellow and dull pink, good condition ; overall in poor condition with flap apparently lost, lifting and losses of cloth and paper, abrasion, staining, delamination of boards, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of at least two main types appearing in different sections ; opening through p.42 and pp.165-456 in a type with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 27-29 mm. apart (vertical), and anchor in circle with star above watermark (68 mm. tall, see p.8, 456, etc.), sturdy, crisp and fairly thick, well-burnished to glossy ; pp.43-164 and pp.457-536 in another type with 10-11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 27 mm. apart (vertical), and eagle with wings spread watermark ("GFA" below, see p.46, etc.), thin and fairly transluscent, burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords, abbreviation symbols (mainly two teeth stroke above notable words), some notabilia (sideheads) and section headings rubricated ; overlining in red ; occasional textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh and nastaʻlīq (talik) ; at least four main Turkish hands ; all mainly serifless and fairly compact ; opening and other hands showing some influence of nastaʻlīq with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 29 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 7 V(70), V+1 (81), 8 V(161), IV (169), I+1 (172), 5 V(222), II+1 (227), 4 V(267), i ; chiefly quinions ; leaves between sections (pp.455-457) left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Explicit: "وترك المخالفة وتلك صفة المؤمنين بالله وهم اهل السلام والكافرون"', 'Incipit: "سميت هذه اللام موطئة للقسم لانها تسهل على السامع تفهم جواب القسم عند اجتماع الشرط ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', "Careful copy of the second of seven volumes (v.1 and v.4 now lacking) of the commentary by Shaykhʻzādah Muḥammad ibn Muṣṭafá al-Qūjawī (d.1544 or 5) upon al-Bayḍāwī's commentary on the Qurʼān, Anwār al-tanzīl wa-asrār al-taʼwīl, covering Sūrat al-Baqarah (2) through Sūrat Āl ʻUmrān (3). Possibly acephalous and ends abruptly."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 82', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.677, copied by Yaʻqūb ibn [?] with transcription finished in Ramaḍān 860 [August 1456].', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 125. Commentary on Majma al-bahrain II."', 'Binding: Pasteboards once covered in blue and white marbled paper (see envelope flap) with spine and edges/turn-ins in brown leather (marbled paper faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in paper ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; endbands virtually gone with only primaries remaining (in green and yellow) ; in poor condition with much moisture damage, abrasion, staining, delamination of boards (layers of manuscript "waste" visible in lower board), etc. ; spine is intact but detaching from textblock along lining ; severe spine slant (cocked).', 'Support: non-European laid paper ; laid lines fairly distinct, spaced 7-8 laid lines per cm., running horizontally ; chain lines running vertically, but difficult to examine, may be in groups of 5 with roughly 13 mm. between the chains ; very smooth, well-burnished ; some ink burn ; a few repairs to initial and final leaves.', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with headings, overlining, sigla, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Turkish hand ; virtually serifless ; quite rounded with many freely assimilated letters ; mainly closed counters ; slight effect of words descending to baseline ; kāf mashkūlah preferred ; hāʼ mudghamah looking like two inverted commas ; final words of line often superscript.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 27 IV(216), IV-1 (223), 12 IV(319), IV+2 (329) ; chiefly quaternions ; leaf has been removed from mid-latter quire but without loss of text (copyist apparently skipped a leaf inadvertently) ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (mistakenly repeats ۲٤٨ and ٣٢٣) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (off by 20 pages, mistakenly skips from p.533 to p.554).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "قد وقع الفراغ من تحرير هذا الكتاب المبارك على يد العبد الضعيف الفقير المحتاج الى رحمة ربه يعقوب بن [كذا] في يوم السبت من ايام شهر رمضان قبل مضي نصفها في سنة ستين وثمانمائة"', 'Explicit: "واجازها محمد حملا لكلامه الى الصرف الى مصالحة تصحيحا له هذا اخر الكلام الحمد لله على التمام ولرسوله افضل السلام"', 'Incipit: "كتاب الحوالة وهي اسم بمعنى الاصالة وهي النقل وفي الشرع نقل الدين من ذمة الى ذمة و هي مشروعة لقوله عم من احيل على ملي اي غني فليتبع ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from inscriptions on front flyleaf and fore-edge flap label.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine early copy of Firişteoğlu's (Firiştezade, ʻAbd al-Laṭīf ibn ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz al-shahīr bi-Ibn Malak) commentary on Majmaʻ al-Baḥrayn of Ibn al-Sāʻātī (d. 696/1296), a compendium on Ḥanafī law, based on the Mukhtaṣar of al-Qudūrī (d. 428/1037) and the Manẓūmah of al-Nasafī (d. 537/1142)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 860 v.1', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.574 (see also inscription on p.3), copied by Sayyid Mihr ʻAlī Raz̤avī with transcription completed 4 Rabīʻ I 1241 [ca. 17 October 1825].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Meredith-Owens notes" -- b. Slip with notes characterizing contents of the entire manuscript (all 8 volumes) in hand of G. Meredith-Owens "M.O. 8. Rawẓat al-ṣafā in 8 volumes. Several copied in 1241 by Sayyid Mahdī Qulī (?) Riẓavī. Vol 4 dated 1070. Vol.7 is dated 1250. Vol.8 is dated 1099. (last folio bound upside down)" -- c. Slip with note "counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" -- d. Partially damaged slip with notes [in hand of Elinor M. Husselman ?] describing contents "[Muḥammad] ibn Khāvand Shāh, ... Mīr Khvānd. Rawẓat al-ṣafā. A general history from creation. 8 v. (v. 7 here ?) of varying ... and hands. 19th cent. ... MS. in Mich. Collection #15"', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 9 v.1', 'Binding: Boards covered in light orange-brown leather decorated in "marble calf" manner ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in a light-blue surface-dyed wove paper ; spine in green and brown leather (now detached) gold-stamped with decorative bands and title "ROOZUT OL SUFA I" ; edges of text block red-flecked ; sewn in white thread over three recessed cords ; Western style worked endbands, damaged with tailband core split and headband detaching and core split ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion and deterioration of leather, spine leather fully detached (exposing printed wasted lining) ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian, "هندوستانی" i.e. "Hindūstānī" according to note on front flyleaf, p.3) laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct, curved) and faint chain lines occasionally visible, some inclusions, somewhat thin and transluscent though sturdy, dark cream in color, well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords, headings and abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke above keywords) rubricated ; some overlining also in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq with elements of shikastah ; fine hand in a thin line ; serifless and compact with effect of words descending to baseline and tilt to the right, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing casual and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 2 (2), 22 IV(178), IV+1 (187), 11 IV(275), V (285), 2 (287), ii ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "هذا تمام شد جلد اول روضة الصفا بتاریخ چهارم شهر ربیع الاول سنه ۱۲۴۱ ... تحریر نمود بخط خام سید مهر [؟] علی رضوی فقط"', 'Incipit: "زیب فهرست نسخه مفاخر انبیاء عالی مکان ..."', 'Title from heading of table of contents on p.5 and colophon on p.574.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the first volume, addressing the creation to Yazdegerd, of the celebrated universal history Rawz̤at al-ṣafāʼ fī sīrat al-anbiyāʼ va al-mulūk va al-khulafāʼ by the Tīmūrid historian Muḥammad ibn Khvāndshāh Mīr Khvānd (d.1498). Table of contents at opening (pp.5-8).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 860 v.7', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.164 (and inscription on inner front flyleaf, p.1), transcription completed 24 Rabīʻ I 1250 [ca. 31 July 1834]. Likely executed by copyist responsible for volumes 1, 3 and possibly 2 of this set, Sayyid Mihr ʻAlī Raz̤avī (سيد مهر على رضوى ).', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with note "counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" -- b. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Meredith-Owens notes" -- c. Scrap with title and date in ink "Rawḍat al-Ṣafā | vol. 7 AH 1250"', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 9 v.7', 'Binding: Boards covered in light orange-brown leather decorated in "marbled calf" manner ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in light-blue surface-dyed wove paper ; spine in dark green and brown leather, gold-stamped with decorative bands and title "ROOZUT OL SUFA 7" ; edges of text block red-flecked ; sewn in white thread over three recessed cords ; Western style worked endbands, good condition ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion and deterioration of leather, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian or Persian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat indistinct, curved) and rare chain lines faintly visible, fairly transluscent though sturdy, cream in color, well-burnished ; flyleaves in European wove paper.', 'Decoration: Keywords, headings and abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth strokes over certain keywords) rubricated ; written area surrounded by red double rule-border (except for pp.103-110, 115 to close) ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq with elements of shikastah ; large, fine hand in a thin line ; serifless with effect of words descending to baseline and tilt to the right, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing casual and in strokes rather than distinct dots (for two and three dots).', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 9 IV(72), V (82), ii ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inner flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "تمت جلد السابع روضة الصفا بتاریخ بیست چهارم شهر ربیع الاول سنه ۱۲٥٠ هجری"', 'Incipit: "خاتمه در بدایع و صنایع و آنچه نکاشته کلک قدرت اوست ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the final (typically eighth) volume or Khātimah of the celebrated universal history Rawz̤at al-ṣafāʼ fī sīrat al-anbiyāʼ va al-mulūk va al-khulafāʼ by the Tīmūrid historian Muḥammad ibn Khvāndshāh Mīr Khvānd (d.1498) and completed by his nephew Ghiyās̲ al-Dīn Khvāndamīr (d.1535). Appears to lack the closing panegyric for Mīr ʻAlī Shīr Navāʼī (Ali Şir Nevai, d.1501). Apparently when the set of manuscripts now comprising Isl. Ms. 860 v.1-v.8 was compiled, this manuscript was mistaken for a copy of the section of the work addressing Sulṭān Ḥusayn Bāyqarā and his sons to 929 [1522-3] (typically found in the seventh volume). Title in colophon and an inscription on the inner front flyleaf (p.1) providing the title, contents, etc. identifies this as the seventh volume but the contents (even as described) are clearly that of the Khātimah or what is typically the eighth volume.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 860 v.5', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; dated seal impression provides only rough terminus ante quem of 1723 ; paper, etc. may suggest late 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Meredith-Owens notes" -- b. Slip with note "counted for 1968/69 Annual Report"', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 9 v.5', 'Binding: Boards covered in light orange-brown leather decorated in "marbled calf" manner ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in light-blue surface-dyed wove paper ; spine in dark green and brown leather, gold-stamped with decorative bands and title "ROOZUT OL SUFA 5" ; edges of text block red-flecked ; sewn in white thread over recessed cords ; Western style worked endbands, fair condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with minor abrasion and deterioration of leather, spine leather detaching, minor delamination of boards, etc.', 'Support: non-European (Persian) laid paper (characterized in inscription on inner front flyleaf (p.3) as "كاغذ ایرانی") with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat indistinct, curving) and chain lines occasionally visible, dark cream to beige in color, thin and sturdy, well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords and headings rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand in a thin line ; serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline and tilt to the right, elongation and somewhat exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 3 VI(36), V+1 (47), 2 VI(71), 3 (74), 5 VI(134), II (138), VI (150), V+1 (161), 2 VI(185), V+1 (196), VI (208), IV-1 (215), ii ; chiefly senions ; sewing difficult to examine but middle of the quire marks in the form of black strokes appear in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf and lower outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Incipit: "آرایش دیباجه مناقب و تاثیر [سلاطین] رفیع مقدار ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the fifth volume, addressing Chingiz Khān and his successors to the time of Tīmūr, of the celebrated universal history Rawz̤at al-ṣafāʼ fī sīrat al-anbiyāʼ va al-mulūk va al-khulafāʼ by the Tīmūrid historian Muḥammad ibn Khvāndshāh Mīr Khvānd (d.1498).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 860 v.6', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon (i.e. colophon does not specify date of transcription) though ownership statement and seal impression in name of Mīr Jumlah provide terminus ante quem of roughly 1663 ; paper, hand, etc. would suggest 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Card with description in pencil "rowẓat al-ṣafā | (MS) | vol. 6 (pages unnumbered) | Date: 1118 AH [crossed out]" -- b. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Meredith-Owens notes" -- c. Slip with note "\'Counted for 1968/69 Annual Report"', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 9 v.6', 'Binding: Boards covered in light orange brown leather decorated in "marbled calf" manner ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in light blue-green surface-dyed wove paper ; spine in dark green and brown leather, gold-stamped with decorative bands and title "ROOZUT OL SUFA 6" ; edges of text block red-flecked ; sewn in white thread over three recessed cords ; worked Western style endbands, in fair condition though headband is detaching ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion and deterioration of leather, upper cover and spine leather detaching, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian or Persian) laid paper ; mainly a type with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat indistinct, some curving) and irregular chain lines faintly visible, thin and crisp though sturdy, dark cream to beige in color, well-burnished ; minor pest damage ; several repairs.', "Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.6 consisting of rectangular piece with basmalah surrounded by gold 'cloud-bands' with blue accents, surmounted by scalloped dome with floral vegetal decoration in blue, lavender, red, etc. on a gold ground, set into a well of red and gold bands bordering a series of blue crosses ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by frame of gold and red bands with outermost blue rule ; illuminated marginal decoration in a band of gold vegetal design on incipit and facing page ; written area elsewhere surrounded by triple rule-border in red and blue fillets ; keywords and headings rubricated.", 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand in a bold line ; serifless with effect tilt to the right, slight effect of words descending to baseline, exaggerated thickness and elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct or conjoined dots, letterforms spaciously arranged though medium in size.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 64 IV(512), IV-1 (519), ii ; exclusively quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of black oblique strokes in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf and the lower outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and skips two pages each between pp.609-610 and 893-894).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تمت کتابت الکتاب عن دفتر السادس من روضة الصفا"', 'Incipit: "جواهر حمد و سپاس و لالی شکر بی قیاس ..."', "Title from inscription on front flyleaf (p.1) and inscription on 'title page' (p.5).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the sixth volume, addressing Tīmūr and his successors to the death of Abū Saʻīd, of the celebrated universal history Rawz̤at al-ṣafāʼ fī sīrat al-anbiyāʼ va al-mulūk va al-khulafāʼ by the Tīmūrid historian Muḥammad ibn Khvāndshāh Mīr Khvānd (d.1498).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 860 v.3', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.372 (and in inscription on inner front flyleaf, p.3), copied by Sayyid Mihr ʻAlī Raz̤avī (who also executed the transcription for vol.1, Isl. Ms. 860 v.1) with transcription completed 9 Rajab 1241 [ca. 17 February 1826].', 'Accompanying materials: Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Meredith-Owens notes" -- b. Scrap with "Rawḍat al-Safā | vol.3 A.H. 1241" between pp.174-175.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 9 v.3', 'Binding: Boards covered in light orange-brown leather decorated in "marble calf" manner ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in a light-blue surface-dyed wove paper ; spine in dark green and brown leather gold-stamped with decorative bands and title "ROOZUT OL SUFA 3" ; edges of text block red-flecked ; sewn in white thread over three recessed cords ; Western style worked endbands, fairly good condition though core of headband is split ; overall in poor condition with abrasion and deterioration of leather, upper cover fully detached, spine leather detaching, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian) laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct, curved) and faint chain lines occasionally visible, some inclusions, somewhat thin and transluscent though sturdy, dark cream in color, well-burnished ; some staining and minor pest damage (with repairs).', "Decoration: Keywords and headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of three 'dots' in red ; written area surrounded by triple rule-border (black fillet between two red fillets).", 'Script: Nastaʻlīq with elements of shikastah ; fine hand in a thin line ; serifless and compact with effect of words descending to baseline and tilt to the right, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing casual and in strokes rather than distinct dots (for two and three dots).', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 2 (2), 23 IV(186), ii ; exclusively quaternions with added leaves carrying table of contents ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, mainly in Arabic, reads "تمت المجلد الثالث بعون الله وحسن توفیقه الحمد لله رب العالمین بتاریخ نهم شهر رجب المرجب سنه احدی واربعین و مائتین بعد الالف ... احقر العباد سید مهر علی رضوی ..."', 'Incipit: "حمد و ثنای که سبحان ملاء اعلی از اداء شمسه ازان عاجز آنید ..."', 'Title from inscription on inner front flyleaf (p.3).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the third volume, addressing the twelve Imāms, the Umayyads and the ʻAbbāsids, of the celebrated universal history Rawz̤at al-ṣafāʼ fī sīrat al-anbiyāʼ va al-mulūk va al-khulafāʼ by the Tīmūrid historian Muḥammad ibn Khvāndshāh Mīr Khvānd (d.1498). Table of contents at opening (pp.5-8).'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Andrea Galvani of Pordenone. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 36 and no. 860.', 'Text rubricated; copyist same as that of Mich. Isl. Mss. 806,2-3.', 'Pp. [1-5]. Bound with: [2] Muḥammad ibn Yūsuf al-Murshidī, Risālah fī al-ʻamal bi-ghayr ālah fī awqāt al-ṣalawāt al-khams, pp. [5-19]; [3] Badr al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad Sibṭ al-Māridīnī, Muqaddimah fī ḥisāb al-masāʾil al-jaybīyah wa-al-aʻmāl al-falakīyah, pp. [20-23].', 'On the description and use of the equatorial semicircle.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 593', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.475, transcription completed 9 Jumādá II 994 [ca. 28 May 1586]. Date composition completed given as Rabīʻ I 985 [May 1577].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 17c" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in purple wove paper (over marbled paper) ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal decoration, compare Déroche class. NSd 11) and pendants, along with tooled rosette accents and rule-border ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in brown and cream, good condition ; overall in quite poor condition with significant losses of leather (exposing boards and linings), delamination of boards, abrasion, staining, etc. ; repairs in dark brown and purple leather as well as dark pink textile (also lining fore edge flap) ; likely not original, somewhat ill-fitting and trimmed down (area around glosses preserved via careful trimming and folding) ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 29 mm. apart (horizontal), and anchor in circle watermark (see p.64) ; well-sized and burnished to glossy ; staining and some ink burn.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs or inverted commas ; written area surrounded by red rule-border.', "Script: Naskh ; clear, compact Ḥijāzī, 'Syrian' or Egyptian [?] hand in a medium line ; virtually serifless with very slight effect of tilt to the left, mainly closed counters, pointing mainly in distinct dots (though casually pointed), occasional vocalization.", 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off verses ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V-1 (9), 6 V(69), IV (77), 15 V(227), IV (235), I (237), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," reads "وقد فرغ مؤلفه من تحريره ووقفت انامل اقلامه من تحبيره في ليلة يسغر صباحها عن سبع مضين من شهر ربيع الاول سنة خمس وثمانين وتسعمائة" ; "Scribal," triangular, reads "وكان الفراغ من تعليق هذه النسخة المباركة في يوم الاربعاء تاسع شهر جمادى الاخير سنة ۹۹۴ احسن الله عاقبتها وغفر لكاتبها ومالكها ولمن دعا لهم ولجميع المسلمين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين"', 'Explicit: "ما لاح نجم على افق السماء وما هب النسيم على العشاق بالطيب والحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام الاثمان الاكملان على سيد الانبياء والمرسلين محمد واله وصحبه الطيبين الطاهرين وسائر الانبياء والرسل وال كل التابعين ومن تبعهم باحسان الى يوم الدين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعل المسجد الحرام حرما امنا ومثابة للناس وامر بتطهير الكعبة البيت الحرام للطائفين والعاكفين وازال عنه الخوف والبأس ... اما بعض فلما وفقني الله تعالى لخدمة العلم الشريف وجعلني من جيران بيته المعظم المنيف [تشوقت] نفسي الى الاطلاع على علم الاثار وتشوقت الي فن التاريخ وعلم الاخبار ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine early copy of the chronicle of Mecca by Quṭb al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn ʻAlāʼ al-Dīn Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Qāḍī Khān Maḥmūd al-Makkī al-Ḥanafī al-Nahrawālī (al-Nahrawānī, d.1582).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 532 v.1', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.297b, copying of the first volume completed (najiza hādhā al-juzʼ al-mubārak...") 8th Shaʻbān 1131 [ca. 26 June 1719]. Copyist is named in colophon of second volume (ʻAlī ibn al-Shaykh ʻAlī ibn al-Shaykh Ḥasan ibn al-Shaykh ʻAlī ibn al-Shaykh ʻUmar al-ʻAmmūrī [ʻUmūrī] al-Mālikī al-Azharī).', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. -- c. small slip with notes inserted between fol.38b-39a (p.76-77).', 'Former shelfmark: From inscription in blue pencil on inner front cover "IL 478" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboard covered in red goatskin ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in European laid paper (lining upper cover apparently once served as back flyleaf for the second volume of this work, compare offset on upper doublure with prayers flanking colophon of Isl. Ms. 532 v.2) ; upper and lower covers bear only very rough, uneven rule-border ; lower cover seems somewhat smaller than upper cover ; material covering boards also matches repairs to binding of the second volume ; in fair condition, though quite worn and spine is peeling.', 'Support: European laid paper ; very clear single chain lines, running vertically and evenly spaced 25-29 mm. apart ; laid lines running horizontally and spaced roughly 10 laid lines per cm. ; some ink burn.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) accompanies opening on fol.1b, consists of rectangular panel containing an empty cartouche in gold flanked by angular vegetal accents in blue, red, and gold ; rectangular panel is surmounted by well with semi-circular piece (dome) evoking the miḥrāb filled with vegetal design in gold, red, blue, and black and surmounted by short \'vertical\' stalks (tīgh) ; gold rule-border on incipit and facing page, with red rule-borders throughout thereafter ; occasional textual dividers in the form of red discs ; keywords such as "قوله", notabilia, and some section headings rubricated ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, compact Egyptian hand ; seriffed with small right-sloping serifs on free standing alif, lām, ṭāʼ, etc., curvilinear though somewhat flattened descenders, pointing mainly in distinct dots, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf) ; same hand appears in second volume.', 'Layout: Written in 39 lines per page; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: V-1 (9), 28 V (289), V-1 (298) ; chiefly quinions flanked by anomalous quinions at front and back ; first two leaves of the first quire may be adhered together, giving the anomalous quinion ; quire numbering in red ink in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals surmounted by the letter kāf (mabsuṭah) appears on the top outer corner of the first folio of each quire; catchwords present ; final folio is completely blank but without missing text ; occasional lacunae throughout are marked "بياض بالاصل" (see fol.68a, 164b, etc.) ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals present but often not visible due to trimming, mistakenly skips from ١٨٨ to ١٩٩ ; foliation in pencil, Hindu-Arabic numerals occasionally appears clarifying and correcting the foliation in ink ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (referenced in cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "نجز هذا الجزء المبارك ثامن يوم حلت في شهر شعبان المبارك من شهور سنة احدى وثلاثين ومائة والف من الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلاة والسلام يليه الجزء الثاني الى اخر الكتاب للامام الحافظ الثاني كابن حجر العسقلاني العلامة ابن علان الصديقي نزيل مكة المشرفة شرفها الله تعالى امين"', 'Explicit: "اي مثل الذي اصابهم او مثل مصابهم فما موصولة امسي او حرفي انتهى [؟] والله سبحانه وتعالى اعلم"', 'Incipit: "وبه ثقتي الحمد لله الذاكر من ذكره والمغدق سحائب النوال على من شكره ... وبعد فيقول فقير رحمة ربه ... محمد علي بن محمد علان البكري الصديقي الشافعي ... وسميته الفتوحات الربانية على الاذكار النواوية ... قوله الحمد لله سيأتي الكلام على الحمد في بابه ان شاء الله تعالى ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "First volume of Ibn ʻAllān's commentary on Ḥilyat al-abrār wa shiʻār al-akhyār, or al-Adhkār al-Nawawīyah, a work of prayers compiled from traditions by Muḥyī al-Dīn Abū Zakarīyā Yaḥyá ibn Sharaf al-Nawawī (d. 676/1277)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 11 v.1', 'Origin: As appears in colophon in lower margin of p.408 and on p.879, copied by Muḥammad Ṣalāḥ al-Dīn ibn Muḥyī al-Dīn ibn Khalīl ibn ʻAbd al-Qādir al-Nābulusī with transcription finished in Shawwāl 1017 [January-February 1609], apparently in Damascus ("... في مدينة الشام"). Copied for (bi-rasm) Farrukh Yāyā Bāshī (Bāshā) ibn Mullā Maḥmūd (Ferruh Yayabaşı b. Mulla Mahmud) who also endowed the book as a waqf for himself, his offspring, and scholars after him (compare Vollers 0214, Refaiya Library, University of Leipzig ; contributions to the cataloguing from Boris Liebrenz).', 'Accompanying materials: Several slips with notes (paginated pp.17-18, pp.63-64, pp.201-202, pp.227-228, pp.229-300, pp.251-252, pp.253-254, and pp.749-750).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 28. Abu Suud\'s Commentary on Kuran. Vol.1." ; "٦٠" on head of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather now overlaid with laid marbled paper (blue, pink, yellow, etc.) and spine repaired with two pieces of red leather ; Type II binding (though flap now lost) ; upper and lower board linings in light green laid paper stamped with floral design ; traces of stamped mandorla in leather under marbled paper ; sewn in dark brown thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and blue, intact ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of paper, boards severely delaminating at foreedge, leather on spine showing red rot, etc. otherwise sound.', "Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. and chain lines spaced 30 mm. apart ; watermarks include fleur de lis, anchor, and 'V V' countermark ; lightly burnished ; leaves of varying heft ; tide-lines from water damage around edges of textblock but usually not entering written area ; several older repairs to leaves.", 'Decoration: Sūrah headings and Qurʼānic passages usually rubricated, also often overlined in red or black ; written area of occasional pages throughout surrounded by red rule-border ; textual dividers in the form of red discs appear on page facing incipit page and following page.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Syrian hand in a medium line ; virtually serifless and compact with mostly closed counters, rectilinear descenders, alif maqsūrah pointed as yāʼ, pointing in distinct dots, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf with shaqq) ; Qurʼānic text usually vocalized ; text of incipit page in a different hand.', 'Layout: Written in 31 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V-1 (9), 10 V(109), IV + 2 (119), 3 V(149), III (155), 2 VI(179), 19 V(369), V+1 (380), III (386), VI - 1 (397), V (407), IV+1 (416), 6 V(476), III (482), i ; incipit page appears be a replacement ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and inserts ; follows p.303 with p.204, dropping 100 pages ; skips two pages between pp.711-712).', 'Colophon: [p.408] "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "تم ذلك بحمد الله وعونه وحسن توفيقه برسم مفخر امثاله العبد الفقير الى الله تعالى فرخ يايا باشى بن المرحوم ملا محمود رحمه الله رحمة واسعة و ختم لمن كان سببا في كتابته بالصالحات اعماله و اصلح اقواله و افقاله و احواله و رفع في الجنة له الدرجات و بدل سياته بالحسنات ... وجعله وقفا على ... ايام حياته ثم على اولاده وذريته ... وعلى اهل العلم من المسلمين راجيا بذلك وجه الله الكريم ... وشهد عليه كاتبه العبد الفقير محمد صلاح الدين بن محي الدين بن خليل بن حاج عبد القادر النابلسي غفر الله و لوالديه و لمشايخه ولاخوانه و لجميع المسلمين امين يا رب العالمين في شوال سنة ١٠١٧"', 'Explicit: "من قرا سورة النحل لم يحاسبه الله تعالى بما انعم عليه في دار الدنيا و ان مات في يوم تلاها او ليلته كان له من من [كذا] الاجر كالذي مات و احسن الوصية و الله تبارك و تعالى اعلم و صلى الله على سيد محمد و اله و صحبه و سلم"', 'Incipit: "سبحان من ارسل رسوله بالهدى و دين الحق و بين له شعائر الشرائع كل ما جل ودق انزل عليه ايات بينات و ابهر حجج قرآنا عربيا غير ذي عوج ... وبعد فيقول العبد الفقير الى رحمة ربه الهادي ابو السعود بن محمد العمادي ان الغاية القصوى من تحرير نسخة العالم و من كان حرف منها مسطورا..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the first volume of Abū al-Suʻūd's commentary on the Qurʼān, beginning with Sūrat al-Fātiḥah and ending with Sūrat al-Naḥl (16). See Mich. Isl. Ms. v.2 for second volume. Description provided mainly by Sarah Mirza."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 555', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon. Codex is comprised of large sections from a ms. dating to possibly the 14th (or even 13th century), supplemented by large sections of replacement leaves the bulk of which perhaps date to the 16th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 404" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western-style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted wove paper ; spine gold-tooled with title and fillets flanking raised bands ; resewn and fairly tightly bound such that sewing is difficult to examine ; in good condition with minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support: Original, older manuscript on non-European laid paper with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (vertical, curved) and chain lines only faintly visible (as well as rib shadows) but possibly grouped with 9-10 mm. between chains, quite thick, soft and floccular ; opening replacement on non-European laid paper of perhaps two other distinct types, one with 8 laid lines per cm. (curved and sagging, horizontal) and no obvious chain lines, and another which may have grouped chain lines (see pp.17-18) ; the remaining replacement sections are on European laid paper of several types, including type with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), 33-35 mm. between chain lines (vertical) and watermarks cross above triple mount in circle (see, p.22, etc., 85 cm. tall, compare Heawood 889) and bull\'s head with eyes, ears and snake on cross above (see p.24, 44, etc.), as well as "PA" or "BA" countermark (see p.180) ; another type with wheeled cart or "char à deux roues" watermark (see p.202, for design compare Briquet, "Papiers et filigranes des archives de Gênes 1154 à 1700," no.72) and at close type with cross above orb and three hats watermarks (for design compare Heawood 2593) ; staining and tide-lines.', 'Decoration: Section headings, keywords, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; basmalah and ḥamdalah at opening in purple ink ; overlining in red.', "Script: Naskh and nastaʻlīq (talik) ; at least three hands in both black and brown inks ; opening replacement section in a fine naskh, compact 'Syrian' or Egyptian hand in a thin line, serifless, with curivlinear descenders and pointing in distinct dots ; main replacements first seen at p.21 in a compact nastaʻlīq (talik) in a medium line, serifless, with mainly curvilinear descenders, mainly closed counters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, point of final nūn typically assimilated with bowl, tilt to the right, etc. ; other hands in naskh and nastaʻlīq (talik) make up the remaining replacement sections and are similar, but more compact ; main hand of older sections (in brown ink) first seen at p.27, a large naskh, 'Syrian' or Egyptian hand, serifless with mainly curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots, shaqq of kāf usually left off (and supplied later in black ink), final hāʼ often assimilated with preceding dāl or rāʼ, partially vocalized.", 'Layout: Written in mainly in 21 lines per page (some sections in 29 lines) ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident in some sections).', 'Collation: Rough assemblage of made quires (additions supplementing what lacked in the older, original manuscript) with sewing nearly impossible to examine ; only a few gatherings of original, older manuscript are intact and these appear to be quinions ; final leaves left blank ; occasional catchwords ; traces of quire numbering in older sections (see p.219) ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, at least two different schemes with one following numerals on upper corner of the verso of the leaf, the other of the recto ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and skips two pages between pp.453 and 454).', 'Explicit: "ولان الحاجة تشتمل الغني والفقير الشرب والنزول والغني لا يحتاج الى صرف هذه الغلة لغناه والله اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي اعلى معالم العلم واعلامه واظهر شعائر الشرع واحكامه ... وقد جرى على الوعد في مبدأ بداية المبتدي ان اشرحها بتوفيق الله شرحا ارسمه بكفاية المنتهى فشرعت فيه والوعد يسوغ بعض المساغ وحين اكاد اتكئ عنه اتكاء الفراغ تبينت فيه نبذا من الاطناب وخشيت ان يهجر لاجله الكتاب فصرفت العنان والعناية الى شرح اخر موسوم بالهداية ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from opening matter on p.4.', 'Ms. composite codex.', "Composite copy of the first part (from Kitāb al-Ṭahārah to Kitāb al-Waqf) of al-Marghīnānī’s celebrated commentary on his Bidāyat al-mubtadiʼ, a treatise on Ḥanafī law. Codex is comprised of large sections from an older manuscript supplemented with later replacements. Contents listing on 'title page' (p.3)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 549', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest 15th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Slip with title (paginated pp.61-62).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 216a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown and cream mottled paper (sponge painted or faux marbled look) with dark teal cloth over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in indigo wove paper ; now sewn in white thread, six stations ; patterned stuck-on endbands ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion, delamination of boards at corners, spine slant (slightly cocked), etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines (vertical) likely grouped in threes with 8-12 mm. between chains and 42-50 mm. between groups (see p.92, 164, 166, 258, etc.) ; sturdy and quite well-burnished to glossy, somewhat cloudy formation with some inclusions.', 'Decoration: Some section headings rubricated.', "Script: Naskh ; elegant, small, compact Turkish or 'Syrian' hand ; serifless with curvilinear descenders (some sweeping), only casually pointed with pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, elongation of horizontal strokes, occasional effect of words descending to baseline, point of final nūn set deep in bowl, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf).", 'Layout: Written in 29 to 31 lines per page.', 'Collation: 18 IV(144), IV+1 (153), IV (161), V (171), 2 IV(187), i ; chiefly quaternions ; leaf split in the 19th quire (see pp.296-297) and text supplied (in a different hand) on the interior ; catchwords present but usually cut off (i.e. lost to trimming) ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert).', 'Explicit: "اما ههنا فالشيوع لا ينفك عن الثلث الموهوب ولا عن الثلثين فلا ينفك"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله وسلام على عباده الذين اصطفى اما بعد فانه لما كان علم الفقه من اشرف ما نيطت به عزائم ذوي الهمم ... جمعت كتابا وسميته بمجمع البرحين وملتقى النيرين ... كان السيد الامير المعظم ... شرف آل عباس عبد الله بن الامير ابي هاشم يوسف ابن الامير ابي قاسم عبد العزيز بن الامام ابي جعفر المستنصر بالله امير المؤمنين ... استدعني بان امل له شرحا مختصرا يهدي ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the first part (from Kitāb al-Ṭahārah to Kitāb al-Hibah) of Muẓaffar al-Dīn Aḥmad ibn ʻAlī Ibn al-Sāʻātī’s commentary on his own compendium of Ḥanafī law, based on the Mukhtaṣar of al-Qudūrī (d.1037) and the Manẓūmah of al-Nasafī (d.1142). Incomplete, ending abruptly before the conclusion of Kitāb al-Hibah. Contents listing on opening leaf (p.1).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1033', 'Origin: Lacks a dated colophon ; paper suggests a dating of 17th century.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 182', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in two different brown leathers with spine and repairs in red leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; likely cobbled together from two distinct covers ; lower cover features a blind-stamped central mandorla (compare Déroche class. NSd 7) and incised frame ; upper board lining in white paper, lower board lining in pink-tinted paper ; sewn in red thread, four stations ; tailband is partially intact ; headband is entirely gone, along with the top edge of the spine.', 'Support: European laid paper with vertical laid lines spaced roughly 7-8 laid lines per cm. and horizontal chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart ; watermark crescent above six-pointed star above crown (similar to Heawood 1132) appears through out ; fol.344 carries a tre lune watermark oriented parallel to the laid lines.', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with keywords, sigla, overlining, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; casual but quite readable with some Persianate characterisitics ; pointed but unvowelled ; mainly closed counters are closed ; fī appears with yāʼ mardūdah ; slight effect of words descending to baseline.', 'Layout: Written in 24-29 lines per page.', 'Collation: ii, 1+IV (9), 2 VI(33), 5 V(83), IV+1 (92), V(102), IV(110), I(112), 5 V(162), VI(174), 8 V(254), 2 IV(270), 7 V(340), 1+II (345), i ; chiefly quinions ; last two leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in Hindu-Arabic numerals begin at p.1 with ۲۴ and ending at my p.685 with ۳۶۶ ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "افتى القاضي الامام صدر الدين السربلي رح ان هذا الوقف غير صحيح معللا بان هذا وقف قبل وجود الموقوف عليه وافتى غيره من اهل زمانه بصحة هذا الوقف وهو الصحيح فانه ذكر في النوازل رجل وقف ارضاء له على اولاد فلان"', 'Incipit: "اليسير كما في هذه المسئلة انه لا يجوز لان المسح على ما ظهر من الخرق ليس بمسح على الخف حقيقة ولا حكما وتماما في البحر الرائق"', 'Title from inscription on tail edge.', 'Ms. codex.', "Neat copy of the first volume of a commentary, attributed to al-Shaykh ʻAbd al-Razzāq, on al-Khaṭīb al-Timirtāshī's Tanwīr al-abṣār, a work of Ḥanafī fiqh; acephalous and end wanting. Description provided by Noah Gardiner."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.1', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.3-4) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.5-6).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Fiber boards (bare) with cream textile over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; hinges in paper over textile ; numeral ١ (indicating volume number) inscribed on upper cover ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, mainly six stations ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with roughly 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-31 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of three crescents (67-68 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.12, 74, 126, etc.) and name "FF. PALAZZUOLI" (for "...AZZUOLI" see p.8, 128, etc. and for "FF. PAL..." see p.2, 10, etc.).', "Decoration: Transfer picture of wheat sheaf with bouquet on 'title page' (p.7).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', 'Collation: 2 VII(28), 2 VI(52), V (62) ; septenions, senions and a quinion ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Explicit: "فان به خلاصي من يد قناصي وان فعلت ما امرتك به والله لاخوانك بل والليل امسى والحديث ليلة غدا وغدا تسمعون يا اخوان ما يأتي في بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على سيد ولد عدنان انتهى الجزء الاول من سيرة الفارس الممارس ويليه الثاني م م"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين وبه نستعين والعقابة للمتقين ولا عدوان الا على الظالمين ... اما بعد فهذه قصة اسد الفوارس ابن جودر الذي جاهد عن دين الاسلام واقر سيدنا محمد سيد ولد عدنان ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.7).", 'Ms. codex.', 'First of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 457', 'Origin: Dating and signature statements supplied in different hand and ink on fol.399b (dating only) and fol.401b (dating and signature) may be that of collator, corrector or glossator and suggest a terminus ante quem of 1349. Statement of fol.399b dated 12 Rabī I 750 [ca. 31 May 1349], reads "لما كان بتاريخ ثاني عشر بربيع الاول سنة خمسين وسبعمائة ...؟" ; statement dated 15 Rabīʻ I 750 [ca. 3 June 1349] and signature of Muḥammad ibn Yaḥyá al-Barakī [?] al-Shāfiʻī on fol.401b reads "لما كان بتاريخ خامس عشر شهر ربيع الاول سنة خمسين وسبعمائة حضر [؟] ... محمد بن يحيى البركي [؟] الشافعي." Hand, paper, etc. certainly consistent with dating of early 14th or even 13th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From spine label, "IL 57" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in assorted red-brown leathers; Type II binding (with flap); upper and lower covers mismatched, clearly of different dimensions and decoration, likely cobbled together from existing covers created for different codices; doublure of upper cover is inscribed with shelfmark ("IL 60c" likely supplied by Yahuda), title, citations, etc. for a different ms.; both upper and lower covers bear a blind-stamped central mandorla though upper should be compared with Déroche class. OSh 2 and lower with Déroche class. OAi 4; envelope flap and fore-edge flap each bear blind-stamped pendants; doublures of laid paper; portions of spine are rotted and detaching from textblock or simply missing; large sections of the textblock are loose; binding has suffered due to size of textblock and is no longer whole; upper and lower covers are each detached from spine; in very poor condition.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper; laid lines running vertically and spaced roughly 7 laid lines per cm. for juzʼ 1 and roughly 6 laid lines per cm. for juzʼ 2; faint impression of chain lines grouped in twos; blank leaf of European laid paper with 3 crescents watermark lies between juzʼ 1 and 2, likely once served as a flyleaf for juzʼ 2.', 'Decoration: Textual dividers in red on incipit and facing page of juzʼ 1 (fol.1b-2a); sūrah and section headings for juzʼ 1 rubricated.', "Script: Naskh; at least four different large, elegant hands (likely Egyptian or Syrian), including the main hand of each juzʼ, the hand supplying an added leaf in the first quire of juzʼ1 and the hand supplying the entire tenth quire of juzʼ 1; headings and Qur'anic text in each juzʼ are supplied in larger naskh.", 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: IV+1 (9), 7 V (79), IV +1 (88), 11 V (198), IV+1 (207), i (208), IV+1 (9), 18 V (397), II (401); chiefly quinions; middle-of-the-quire marks appear in the form of dots (juzʼ 1 from at least fol.143b) or short oblique strokes (juzʼ 2 fore nearly all quires) placed in the upper corner of the right-hand leaf and lower corner of the left-hand leaf; quire numbering in the form of full words appears in juzʼ 2 for nearly all quires from the second quire on, though for most part of word(s) is cut off; catchwords present, though appear to have been added later; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (referenced in cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "كمل الجزء الثاني والحمد لله وحده وصلى الله على محمد واله وسلم كثيرا يتلوه في الجزء الثالث معنى اكل الاموال على وجهين"', 'Explicit: "بقوله ويابي الله وكيف اوقع موقع ولا يريد الله الا ان يتم نوره"', 'Incipit: "اللهم صلى الله على محمد واله وسلم الحمد لله الذي انزل القرآن كلاما مؤلفا منظما"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '3. fol.209a-401b : al-Juzʼ al-thānī min al-Kashshāf / Abū al-Qāsim Maḥmūd ibn ʻUmar al-Zamakhsharī.', '2. fol.208a-208b : [blank].', '1. fol.1a-207b : al-Juzʼ al-awwal min tafsīr al-Kashshāf ʻan ḥaqāʼiq al-tanzīl / Abū al-Qāsim Maḥmūd ibn ʻUmar al-Zamakhsharī.', "Two parts of al-Zamakhsharī's celebrated commentary on the Qur'an, covering the first nine suras. Part one covers Sūrat al-Fātiḥah through Sūrat al-Nisāʼ, and part two covers the remainder of Sūrat al-Nisāʼ through Sūrat al-Tawbah. Each part was once contained in its own volume (see traces of former envelope flap on fol.209a-210b) and later the two codices were rebound in a single volume."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.21', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover, "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', "Binding: Fiber boards covered in a now dull yellow paper with cream textile over spine and dull olive paper on some board edges ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted paper, hinges in recycled paper (ms. 'waste') ; numeral ٢١ (indicating volume number) inscribed on upper and lower covers ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, four stations ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, staining, losses of paper, creases and minor losses to boards, etc.", "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.2, etc.).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', "Collation: VIII (16), VII (30), VIII (46), VIII+1 (63) ; octonions (one anonmalous) and a septenion ; final leaf left blank (serves as a 'flyleaf') ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: " يا ملجأ الفقراء وقاضي مرامها يا فارس الاقطار جميعها والليل امسى وصارت الليلة غلسى والحديث ليلة غدا وغدا تسمعون يا اخوان ما جرى في بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على بدر التمام انتهى الجزء الحادي والعشرون من سيرة اسد الفوارس ويليه الثاني والعشرون م"', 'Incipit: "وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد النبي الامي وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين قال الراوي هذا ما كان منهم ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Twenty-first of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 2', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper may suggest 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 90. Kuran XXI."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in paper, interior of envelope and fore edge flaps in blue silk ; upper and lower cover bear simple blind-tooled design of circles and lines along with border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; paper label on cover reads "الجزء احدى وعشرون ٢۱" ; sewn in magenta thread, four stations ; in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, and moisture damage ; upper cover detaching from textblock.', 'Support: European laid paper with chain lines running horizontally spaced 26 mm. apart and laid lines spaced roughly 10 laid lines per cm. ; watermarks include eagle, wings and legs spread, with "B G" below alternating with scrollwork or coat of arms with crown above and inside lion rampant (?) ; some ink and leather burn.', 'Decoration: Illuminated marginal rosette with vertical stalk accents marks the opening of this juzʼ ; textual dividers in the form of gold discs mark verse endings ; written area framed by a heavy gold band flanked with black fillets ; simple rectangular panels bear each sūrah heading in gold-framed cartouche ; empty tailpiece in the form of a roundel outlined in gold appears on fol.13b (p.26) ; text rubricated with sūrah headings, sigla (namely "ط" for "مطلق" to mark pauses), etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Ottoman hand (?) ; partially seriffed with tear-drop head serif on shafts for lām, ṭāʼ, etc. but not free-standing alif ; point of final nūn often joined to bowl ; slight effect of tilt to the left ; graceful but heavy line ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: VII (14) ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil supplied during digitization.', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the twenty-first juzʼ of the Qurʼān which together with Isl. Ms. 3 forms part of a multi-volume muṣḥaf with each juzʼ bound in a single volume. As expected, opens with al-ʻAnkabūt verse 46 (29:46) and closes with al-Aḥzāb verse 30 (33:30).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.11', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From verso of outermost leaf at opening (in this case, incipit page, p.2), "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', "Binding: Lacks cover (outermost leaf at opening carries 'title page') with traces of hinges ; numeral ١١ (indicating volume number) inscribed on verso of back flyleaf (outermost leaf) ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, mainly four stations ; overall in fair condition despite lacking cover, with much staining, tears and losses to paper, etc.", "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.2, etc.).", "Decoration: Transfer picture of a poppy-like flower with stems, leaves and buds on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', "Collation: VII (14), 2 VIII(46), VII+1 (61) ; octonions and septenions (one anomalous) ; final leaf left blank (serves as a 'flyleaf') ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes outermost leaves).", 'Explicit: "انا غدا اقدم لك عريضه للملك والليل امسى وصارت الليلة غلسى وغدا يأتي بقية هذا الكلام وتسمعون يا اخوان ... واصلي واسلم على سيد ولد عدنان انتهى الجزء الحادي عشر من سيرة الملك اسد الفوارس ويليه الثاني عشر"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام على سيد المرسلين سيدنا محمد النبي الامي الهاشمي الابطحي الزمزمي وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين قال الراوي نجد ابن هشام ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Eleventh of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 885', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.969 (and at close of باب الف ممدوده on p.978), copied by Mathurādās Khatrī, date not specified ; decoration, paper, etc. would suggest late 18th or early 19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Scrap cut from a Luzac catalog page with description and price for this manuscript "PERSIAN AND HINDUSTANI MSS. 175 Bahar i ʻajam. The well-known Persian dictionary. MS. Folio. Over 1000 pp. Leather binding. The colophon is dated A.H. 1243 ( = A.D. 1827), under the reign of Muhammad Akbar Shâh (II.) £2 10s." (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Recycled card with handwriting of Emilie Savage-Smith [?] "ʻunwān or illum. frontispiece or heading." (paginated pp.3-4) -- c. Scrap of paper with title in ink "Bahār i ʻAjam." (paginated pp.5-6) -- d. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) No Husselman or Meredith-Owens notes" (paginated pp.7-8).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 34', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in deep red leather ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted wove paper ; upper and lower covers carry delicate gold-tooled border in a rope pattern ; spine stamped "BUHARE | UJUM" ; now sewn in white thread over three cords ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and blue, good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with upper cover fully detached, some abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical or horizontal, fairly distinct, some curving) and irregular chain lines faintly visible, sturdy, well-burnished, dark cream in color ; flyleaves / added leaves in wove paper.', 'Decoration: Splendid illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.10 consisting of rectangular piece with cartouche (carrying the basmalah) flanked by pendants and delicate swirling floral vegetal decoration in blue, red, orange, and white on a gold ground, surmounted by scalloped w-shaped piece filled with more elaborate swirling floral vegetal decoration in red, orange, white, blue, green, etc. on grounds of gold with blue, green and white accents, itself surmounted by a pendant filled with similar decoration as well as fine vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue, entire piece set into a well consisting of a rather heavy gold band outlined by narrow bands of orange and gold defined by black fillets ; written area throughout surrounded by a gold frame with innermost red rule, and outer red and blue rules, further blue rule defines margin ; keywords and headings rubricated ; overlining or two-teeth abbreviation symbol in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand in a medium line ; serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing (two and three dots) mainly in distinct or conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 14 IV(112), III (118), IV+1 (127), 12 IV(223), IV+2 (233), 26 IV(441), II (445), IV+1 (454), 3 IV(478), IV-1 (485), iii ; chiefly quaternions ; lacuna on p.458 marked with "ص" ; p.970 prior to opening of Bāb-i alif-i mamdūdah left blank ; lacks proper catchwords but last word of final line on the verso of each leaf is usually repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "الحمد لله والمنة که باتمام رسید منتخب کتاب بهار عجم تالیف استادی مخدومی تیک چند بهار بخط فقیر حقیر اضعف العباد متهراداس قوم کهتری فقط"', 'Incipit: "مهار آفرینی که کلبرک ... دیباچه اصل بهار عجم سپاس و ستایش ایزد متعال را در خور که هريکى ار افراد انسان ..."', 'Title from opening matter (p.11) and colophon (p.978).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the dictionary of words and idioms used by the Persian poets compiled by Tīk Chand Bahār (d.1766) with added preface.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1011', 'Origin: As appears in final colophon on fol.335b, copied by ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad ibn Ḥasan al-Khūrāsgānī [?] (علی بن محمد بن حسن الخوراسگانی) with transcription finished ("faragha taḥrīr hādhā al-kitāb...") on Monday 14th Rabīʻ II 1039 [ca. 1 December 1629]. Composition finished in Dhū al-Qaʻdah 708.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 160', 'Accompanying materials: Long strip on blue tinted laid paper (single chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart; laid lines spaced roughly 8 laid lines per cm.) inserted between fol.216b-217a (p.432-33); bears statement of purchase/sale [?] dated Rajab 1240 [i.e. February-March 1825] in Persian along with seal impression.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather (goatskin); Type II (with flap); upper and lower covered bear simple border consisting of a frame of s-shaped stamps laid end to end (rather than interlocking) flanked by gold painted fillets; envelope flap bears simple border of gold painted fillets on envelope; doublures of soft grey-brown leather (very dirty); in fair condition, though upper board is delaminating and upper board cover is beginning to detach from spine.', "Support: non-European (very likely Persian) laid paper with laid lines running vertically (roughly 7 laid lines per cm.) and sagging in some leaves, chain lines occasionally visible and running horizontally, but too difficult to see and measure; many inclusions; one side more highly burnished than the other; marks of burnisher's tool occasionally visible; page repairs (for a few leaves only) are supplied in a different laid paper (11 laid lines per cm.) with some minor loss of text.", 'Decoration: Text partially rubricated with section headings and markers such as مسئلة in red; lacking in latter part of text (final ten quires, see fol.257a/p.513) with blanks left where rubrics have gone unsupplied.', 'Script: Naskh; Persianate hand; occasional right-sloping serifs on free standing alif and lām of definite article, left sloping serifs on lām of lām alif ligature; mostly closed counters; kāf mashkūlah preferred; a few marginal corrections and glosses in nastaʻlīq; inscription on on inserted slip in shikastah.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: 41 IV (328), IV-1 (335); exclusively quaternions (including anomalous quaternion); catchwords present; blanks left for unsupplied rubrics in last fifteen quires; leaves left partially blank and unmarked between the azjāʼ (juzʼ 5-6 and juzʼ 6-7); pagination in pencil, Western numerals supplied in cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "..رغ تحرير هذا الكتاب المسمى بمختلف الشيعة في احكام الشريعة [من اوله] الى اخره على يد الفقير المذنب المحتاج الى رحمة الله الملك العزيز العلام جل جلاله علي بن محمد بن حسن الخوراسكانى [؟] چى ... اصفهان عراقعجم في يوم الاثنين رابع عشر من شهر ربيع الثاني سنة تسع وثلاثين بعد الف من الهجرة تم تم تم"', 'Explicit: "وقد روى اصحابنا ان الساحر يقتل والوجه في هذه الرواية ان هذا من الساحر فساد في الارض والسعي فلذلك وجب فيه القتل والوجه ان نقول [ان كان؟] للسحر حقيقة يصح باعتبارها التاثير وجب القود [؟] والافلا و[وليكن هذا؟] اخر ما اوردنا اثباته في هذا الكتاب مقتصرين عليه حامدين لله تعالى على الائمة [؟] شاكرين على فواضل نعماته مصلين على سيد انبيائه محمد المصطفى وعلى المعصومين من ابنائه فرغت من تسويده خامس عشر [؟] شهر ذي القعده من سنة ثمان ووسبعمائة والحمد لله وحده وصلى الله على سيد المرسلين محمد النبي واله الطاهرين وكتبه العبد [الفقير الى؟] الله تعالى حسن بن يوسف بن مطهر المصنف والحمد لله وحده"', 'Incipit: "الفصل الرابع في العيوب والتدليس مسئلة قال الشيخ في الخلاف والمبسوط الرجل يفسخ بستة اشياء الجنون والجذام والبرص والرتق والقرن والافضاء ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "The final part (juzʼ 6 through juzʼ 7) of ʻAllāmah-i Ḥillī's work on interpretation and practice of Islamic law according to the Shīʻī Ithná ʻasharī school."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 23', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests 17th century.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 56. Hadith (Traditions) of Kastallani."', 'Binding: Both upper and lower covers lost, though spine remains intact ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked endbands in pink and lime green, intact ; overall in poor condition with covers lost, lifting and losses to spine leather, abrasion and staining of outermost leaves of textblock, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', "Support: European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 22 mm. apart (vertical), and crown star crescent watermark with 'A D' countermark ; thick and well-burnished to glossy ; some staining.", 'Decoration: Section headings and text being commented upon (text of Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī) rubricated (pp.362-367 lack rubrics) ; letters of section headings of elongated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh ; bold, clear likely Egyptian hand ; very slight effect of tilt to the left, occasionally more apparent ; mainly serifless though occasional right-sloping headserifs appear irregularly on free-standing alif, lām, etc. ; many open counters ; pointing in distinct dots, liberally spaced ; alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ and often mardūdah ; descenders tending toward rectilinear ; rightward descenders tapered ; kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred, with even final kāf bearing shaqq ; occasional free assimilation of some letters ; partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 33 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: I (2), 7 V(72), 3 IV(96), 2 V(116), IV (124), 22 V(344), IV (352) ; chiefly quinions with a few scattered quaternions ; opening single bifolium blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (drops twenty pages following p.689 with p.670).', 'Explicit: "حدثنا ابو عوانة الوضاح عن ابن عبد الله اليشكري عن ابي بشر بكسر الموحدة وسكون المعجمة جعفر ابن ابي وحشية اياس اليشكري عن سعيد ابن جبير قال ان الذي"', 'Incipit: "ابن سعد من يشتري مني تمرا بجزر يوفيني الجزر ههنا واوفيه التمر بالمدينة"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of an odd fifth volume of Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad al-Qasṭallānī's exhaustive commentary on the Ṣaḥīḥ of al-Bukhārī, opening in Kitāb al-Maghāzī just before Bāb Ḥajj Abī Bakr bi-al-nās fī sanat tisʻ and ending abruptly in Kitāb Faḍāʼil al-Qurʼān, Bāb Taʻlīm al-ṣibyān al-Qurʼān."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.5', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From verso of outermost leaf at opening (in this case, incipit page, p.2), "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', "Binding: Lacks cover (outermost leaf carries 'title page') through traces of hinges remain ; numeral ٥ (indicating volume number) inscribed on verso of final leaf ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, mainly four but also five and eight stations ; overall in fair condition despite lacking cover, with staining, tears and losses to paper, spine slant (cocked), etc.", "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.4, 34, 73, etc.).", "Decoration: Transfer picture of flower with stems and leaves on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', 'Collation: V+1 (11), 4 V(51), V+1 (62) ; exclusively quinions ; outerleaves serve as flyleaves ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes outermost leaves).', 'Explicit: "لان بيننا وبين بلاد السند صفاوز وقفار واريد الان ان والليل امسا والحديث ليلة غدا وغدا تسمعون يا اخوان ما يأتي في بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على بدر التمام ومصباح الظلام انتهى الجزء الخامس من سيرة اسد الفوارس ويليه السادس"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام على سيد المرسلين سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين قال الراوي ثم ان قراغول مسكه العبد من قباطي بطنه ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fifth of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.25', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on pp.112-113, authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī. All volumes presumably copied by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription of the set completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895].', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From verso of opening leaf (p.2), "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', 'Binding: Lacks cover ; numeral ٢٥ (indicating volume number) inscribed on outer leaves ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, six and four stations ; overall in fair condition despite lacking cover, with much staining, some tears, etc.', "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.2, 62, 64, etc.).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', 'Collation: 2 VIII(32), VII (46), VIII (62) ; three octonions and a septenion ; final five leaves left blank ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes outermost leaves).', 'Colophon: "Authorial" and "Scribal," reads "حمدا لمن قص على افضل خلقه احسن القصص ... اما بعد فقد تم بعونه من نور النهار وجعل الليل دامس نسخ السيرة الجليلة المنيعة [؟] عما جري من اخبار الملك اسد الفوارس فهي سيرة جليلة واخبار بديعة غريبة ... وكان الملتزم لنسخها عبد ربه غافر الزلات محمد ابن الحاج سليمان عرفات وقد الفها عبيد ربهم الباري محمد سليمان عرفات وامين ابن محمد الساري وفاح مسك الختام ولاح بدر التمام في ٢٠ الحجة عام اثنى عشر والف وثلثمائة من هجرة النبي الاعظم صلى الله عليه وسلم وعظم وشرف وكرم ... امين"', 'Explicit: "فتولى الملك ابا الافهاد وعدل بين العباد الى ان اتاهم هادم اللذات ومفرق الجماعات فسبحان من لا يانام ولا يموت وهو الله الحي القيوم وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد النبي الامي وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم"', 'Incipit: "وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد النبي الامي وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم قال الراوي وقد وقع الشيخ ابراهيم ابن ابي الخيرات وهو يقول اشهد ان لا اله الا الله واشهد ان سيدنا ابراهيم خليل الله ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Twenty-fifth of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.15', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover, "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', 'Binding: Fiber boards covered in a dull yellow paper with cream textile now over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in bright pink coated paper ; numeral ١٥ (indicating volume number) inscribed on upper and lower covers ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, mainly four stations ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, staining, losses of paper, boards splitting, etc.', "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.4, 124, etc.).", "Decoration: Transfer picture of a flower with stems and leaves on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', "Collation: VIII (16), VII (30), VIII (46), VIII+1 (63) ; octonions (one anonmalous) and a septenion ; final leaf left blank (serves as a 'flyleaf') ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "فقال نحن من مداين خراخير وملكنا والليل امسى والحديث ليلة غدا وغدا تسمعون يا اخوان ما يأتي في بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على بدر التمام انتهى الجزء الخامس عشر من سيرة اسد الفوارس ويليه ۱٦ م"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام على سيد المرسلين سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين قال الراوي وجلس اسد الفوارس في الديوان وامر باحضار قلم وقرطاس ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fifteenth of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 456', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.206b, copied ("wa-faragha min kitbatih [kitābatih ?]...") by Walī ibn Muṣṭafā ibn Isḥaq (Veli b. Mustafa b. İshak). Below the colophon, the date 906 [1500 or 1501] has been supplied ("تاريخه سنة ستة وتسعمائة"), perhaps by one of the glossators (compare gloss in upper margin and scribal verses in outer margin). A birth notice below the colophon ("تاريخ مولود عبدى بن ولى خليفة [؟] سنة تسع وتسعمائة") is further dated 909 [1503 or 4], likely supplied by one of the glossators. Paper, hand, etc. are consistent with a late 15th century dating.', 'Accompanying materials: Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas along with several slips tipped in or bound in (see fol.40-41, fol.85-86, fol.102-103, etc.).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, "IL 344a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Thin pasteboard covered in brown leather with red leather repairs ; once Type II binding (with flap) though only traces of fore-edge flap remain ; upper and lower covers carry large gold-stamped central mandorla (compare Déroche class. OAi6) with pendants and gold-stamped border ; board linings of marbled paper in blue, red, and white ; endpapers of marbled paper in red, blue, green, yellow, and purple ; in poor condition, though much repaired.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with chain lines running vertically and grouped in threes ; laid lines running horizontally and spaced roughly 9 laid lines per cm. ; endpapers of heavy European laid paper, chain lines clearly visible and spaced roughly 22-27 mm. apart, bearing watermark with crown, grapes (raisin) and name "VANANT" [?].', 'Decoration: Sūrah headings and Qurʼānic excerpts rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, neat Turkish hand in a medium line ; entirely sans serif, rounded with curvilinear descenders, effect of slight tilt to the left, some elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots or strokes (representing three dots in particular), point of final nūn often assimilated with bowl ; glosses in various hands.', 'Layout: Written in 25 ines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: 20 V (200), III+1 (207) ; quinions followed by ternion with added leaf ; seventh quire has misplaced single bifolium, correctly paginated and now inserted between fol.63b and fol.64a (Western pagination) ; catchwords present but occasionally cut off due to trimming of leaves ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during cataloguing, referenced in description).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular or trapezoidal, reads: "والحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على خير خلقه محمد واله واصحابه وعترته الطيبين الطاهرين اجمعين وفرغ من كتبته [؟] العبد الضعيف المفتقر الى رحمة الله تعالى وغفرانه ولي بن مصطفى بن اسحق غفر الله لهم ولجميع اقربائهم امين يا رب العالمين تم"', 'Explicit: "اخبرنا...انه قال النبي صلى الله ع م يقول ما اذن الله لشيء ما اذن لنبي حسن الصوت بالقران يجهر به اخر الكتاب"', 'Incipit: "سورة يس مكية بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم يس ول والقلم باخفاء النون..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fourth volume of al-Baghawī's commentary on the Qur'an, from Sūrat Yā Sīn (36) to Sūrat al-Nās (114). Lengthy extratextual quotations, notes, and glosses following the text and on slips tipped in or bound in various places (see fol.40-41, fol.85-86, fol.102-103, etc.)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.4', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover, "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', "Binding: Fiber boards covered in dark brown/black, green and now beige mottled paper (sponge painted or faux marbled look) with cream textile now over spine (traces of red cloth underneath) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted wove paper ; recycled paper (i.e. ms. 'waste' carrying title for sixth volume) used for hinges ; numeral ٤ (indicating volume number) inscribed where spine material overlaps on upper and lower covers ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, mainly four but also five and seven stations ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of paper, losses to boards, etc.", 'Support: European laid paper ; mainly with roughly 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-31 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of three crescents (67-68 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.12, etc.) and name "FF. PALAZZUOLI" (for "...AZZUOLI" see p.24, etc. and for "FF. PAL..." see p.10, etc.) ; a few leaves at opening and final gathering in another type with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above "FERDINANDO BETTI" itself above word in Arabic script "ليكوريا" (see p.4, 8, 105, 114, 115, etc.).', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', 'Collation: VI (12), 5 V(62) ; chiefly quinions ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "فهجم عليه العبد ومسكه من قباطى بطنه والليل امسا والحديث ليلة غدا وغدا تسمعون يا رجال ما يأتي في بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على سيد ولد عدنان انتهى الجزء الرابع من سيرة اسد الفوارس و يليه الخامس م"', 'Incipit: "اللهم صل وسلم وبارك على سيدنا محمد النبي الامي وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم قال الراوي ولما فرغ اسد الفوارس من كلامه ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fourth of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 461', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.907, transcription completed 17 Jumādá II 1091 [ca. 15 July 1680].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Scrap of paper with "تفسير الانصاري القرطبي على القرآن" in pencil (pp.1-2) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.3-4) -- c. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.5-6).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, front flyleaf, and spine label "IL 49c" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures (board linings) in marbled paper (mainly in pink, salmon, yellow, and dark blue) ; upper and lower covers carry gold-stamped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition, gold leaf lost from ornament on upper cover) with pendants and gold-painted accents, as well as tooled rule-border ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in light blut and yellow, quite good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion and staining, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), single chain lines spaced roughly 25 mm. apart (vertical), and crown-star-crescent watermark (see pp.39-40, pp.93-94, etc. ; compare Nikolaev, Watermarks of the Ottoman Empire, v.1 nos. 257, 268, 273, etc. and Heawood 1131-1133) ; crisp though thick and sturdy ; highly burnished.', "Decoration: Somewhat crudely executed 'illuminated' headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.(8) consisting of rectangular piece with empty 'gold' (golden yellow) cartouche flanked by blue accents surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) with flowers in 'gold' with red accents on a blue ground, all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and red and set into a well of red with black accents ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by elaborate frame consisting of gold, green, red and black bands ; written area elsewhere surrounded by double red rule-border ; sūrah and section headings (الاولى، الثانية، الخ) as well as other keywords (قوله تعالى، الخ) rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; occasional overlining of Qurʼānic excerpts (see pp.122, 133-34, 155, etc.).", 'Script: Naskh ; small, compact Egyptian hand ; partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serif, slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots, mainly closed counters, somewhat freely ligatured.', 'Layout: Written in 35 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV+1 (9), 43 V(439), V+1 (450), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of quire numbering in Hind-Arabic numerals begins with "٣٠" on p.655 and continues through final quire, concluding with "۴۲" on p.897 rather than p.899 where expected ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and skips ahead two pages following p.865 with p.868).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تمت النسخة المباركة بحمد الله وعونه وحسن توفيقه والحمد لله وحده وكان الفراغ من كتابتها يوم الاحد سابع عشر جمادى الاخرة سنة واحد وتسعين والف من الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلاة واتم التسليم وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين وسلام على المرسلين والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Explicit: "قال ان الله عز وجل تجاوز لامتي عما حدثت به انفسها ما لم تعمل او تتكلم [تكلم] به رواه ابو هريرة خرجه مسلم والله تعالى اعلم"', 'Incipit: "سورة يس مكية وهي باجماع من الانصار وهي ثمانون وثلاث ايات الا ان فرقة قالت ان قوله ونكتب ما قدموا واثارهم نزلت في بني سلمة ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.7).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the fourth part of the well-known commentary on the Qurʼān by Abū ʻAbd Allāh Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad ibn Abī Bakr ibn Faraj al-Anṣārī al-Khazrajī al-Andalusī (d.1272), opening in Sūrat Yāsīn (36) and concluding in Sūrat al-Nās (114).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.24', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover, "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', 'Binding: Fiber boards covered in a now dull yellow paper with cream textile over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in bright pink coated paper ; numeral ٢٤ (indicating volume number) inscribed on upper and lower covers ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, six and four stations ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, staining, losses of paper, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper ; one type (opening to p.32 and p.97 to close) with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above \'FERDINANDO BETTI\' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.2, 110, etc.) ; another type (pp.33-96) with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of three crescents (68 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.36, 38, 40, 42, 64, etc.) and "S S B" (see p.44, 46, 48, 70, etc.).', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', "Collation: 3 VIII(48), VII+1 (63) ; three octonions and an anomalous septenion ; final leaf left blank (serves as a 'flyleaf') ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).", 'Explicit: " فوقع وهو يقول اشهد ان لا اله والليل امسى والحديث ليلة غدا وغدا تسمعون يا اخوان ما جرا في بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على سيد ولد عدنان انتهى الجزء الرابع والعشرون من سيرة الملك اسد الفوارس ويليه الجزء الخامس والعشرون م"', 'Incipit: "وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد النبي الامي وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم قال الراوي كما سبق معنا الكلام ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Twenty-fourth of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.14', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover, "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', 'Binding: Fiber boards covered in bright pink coated paper with cream textile now over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted paper ; numeral ۱٤ (indicating volume number) inscribed on upper and lower covers ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, mainly four or six stations ; overall in fair poor condition with abrasion, staining, losses of paper, lifting of textile, etc.', "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.4, 24, etc.).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', "Collation: VIII (16), VII (30), VIII (46), VIII+1 (63) ; octonions (one anonmalous) and a septenion ; final leaf left blank (serves as a 'flyleaf') ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "وجلس اسد الفوارس بالصيوان [الديوان] وامر باحضار قلم وقرطاس والليل امسى وصارت الليلة غلسى والحديث ليلة غدا وغدا تسمعون يا اخوان ما يأتي في بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على المظلل بالغمام انتهى الجزء الرابع عشر من سيرة اسد الفوارس ويليه الخامس عشر م"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام على سيد المرسلين سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين قال الراوي ثم ان قاهر الدشمان ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fourteenth of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 894', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.189 (accompanied by scribal verses), copied by Murtaz̤á ibn Muḥammad with transcription completed in 1073 [1662 or 3].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with description (in hand of E. Husselman ?) "ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Aḥmad, called Jāmī. Bahāristān | Have many parts of the Haft Awrang, and some other poems, but apparently not this in Mich. MS. Isl." (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Slip of paper with description in hand of G. Meredith-Owens "MO 18 Bahāristān of Jāmī | copied in 1073" (paginated pp.3-4) -- c. Slip with note "counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" (paginted pp.5-6) -- d. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Husselman and Meredith-Owen notes" (paginated pp.7-8).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 43', 'Binding: Boards covered in grey mottled (sponge-stained look) paper with green fading to tan leather over spine and board corners (half binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted laid paper ; spine accented with raised bands and gold-stamped title, author and shelfmark "BEHĀRI- STĀN E DJĀMĪ | MS. 1073" ; head edge of text block gilt ; sewn in white thread, over recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands ; overall in fair condition with slight abrasion, loss of pigment, etc. ; not original, note on upper pastedown describes rebinding.', 'Support: European laid paper of a few types ; opening type with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27-28 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (about 80 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.24, 30, 84, 42, etc.) ; another type with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-28 mm. apart (horizontal), and crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.38, 42, 54, 56, 190, etc.) ; another type with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain line spaced 26-28 mm. apart (horizontal) and three crescents watermark (75 mm. tall, perpendicular to chains, see p.118, 150, etc.) ; all quite sturdy, dark cream in color, well-sized and burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords and headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; written area of incipit page surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Naskh with influence of nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand in a medium line ; mainly serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, exaggerated elongation of horizontal strokes, curvilinear descenders, pointing (two and three dots) mainly in strokes rather than distinct dots, occasional effect of words descending to baseline ; hand changes just before close (pp.187-189) to a more compact nastaʻlīq.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iv, V (10), 2 VI(34), 4 V(74), VI (86), I (88), iii ; quinions and senions ; catchwords present ; text of p.26 apparently mistakenly entered by the copyist upside down (dotted lines provided for navigational clues) ; foliation in black ink, Western numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب على يد الضعيف عباد الصمد مرتضى بن محمد غفر الله له ولوالديه ولمن دعا له بالمغفره ... سنه ثلث وسبعين بعد الالف سنه ۱۰۷۳ ..."', 'Incipit: "چو مرغ امر ذی بالی ز آغاز نه از نیروی حمد آید به پرواز ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Jāmī's collection of sayings, anecdotes, short notes and stories."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.7', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From verso of opening leaf (p.2), "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', 'Binding: Lacks cover, though spine carries traces of hinges in paper ; numeral ٧ (indicating volume number) inscribed on outer leaves ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, mainly four but also seven stations ; overall in fair condition despite lacking cover, with staining, some tears, etc.', "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.4, 20, 22, etc.).", "Decoration: Transfer picture of a carnation with stems and leaves on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', "Collation: VI (12), 4 V(52), V+1 (63) ; chiefly quinions ; opening and final leaves left blank (serve as 'flyleaves') ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "صار الضياء في عينه ظلام وصرخ عليه صوت زلزل الاكام وقال له يا ابن اللئام تهتني بكلامك والليل امسى وصارت الليلة غلسه والحديث ليلة غدا وغدا تسمعون يا كرام ما يأتي في بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على سيد ولد عدنان انتهى الجزء السابع من سيرة اسد الفوارس ويليه الثامن م"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام على سيد المرسلين سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين قال الراوي الناقل لهذا الكلام ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Seventh of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.17', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover, "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', 'Binding: Fiber boards covered in bright pink coated paper (upper cover) and now dull yellow paper (lower cover) with cream textile over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; upper board lining in untinted paper, lower board lining in same bright pink coated paper ; numeral ١٧ (indicating volume number) inscribed on upper and lower covers ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, mainly four stations ; overall in quite poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, losses of paper, losses to boards, etc.', "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.4, etc.).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', "Collation: VIII (16), VII (30), VIII (46), VIII+1 (63) ; octonions (one anonmalous) and a septenion ; final leaf left blank (serves as a 'flyleaf') ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly skips two pages between pp.55-56).", 'Explicit: "فانا الفارس القهار [؟] حقا بيوم الطعن ويوم البرازي والليل امسى والحديث ليلة غدا وغدا تسمعون يا اخوان ما يأتي في بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على بدر التمام انتهى الجزء السابع عشر من سيرة اسد الفوارس ويليه الجزء الثامن عشر باذن خالق البشر"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام على سيد المرسلين سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين قال الراوي فالتفت صفرين الى اسد الفوارس وقال يا ملك الزمان ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Seventeenth of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.6', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From verso of opening leaf (p.2), "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', 'Binding: Lacks cover, though spine carries traces of hinges in paper ; numeral ٦ (indicating volume number) inscribed on outer leaves ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, mainly four but also eight stations ; overall in fair condition despite lacking cover, with staining, some tears, spine slant (cocked), etc.', "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.2, 12, etc.).", "Decoration: Traces of a transfer picture of scene with sword, gun, bird, kettle, etc. on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', "Collation: VI (12), 4 V(52), V+1 (63) ; opening and final leaves left blank (serve as 'flyleaves') ; chiefly quinions ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes outermost leaves).", 'Explicit: "وفارق الرأس البدن ... الطوائف على بعضها البعض والليل امسى والحديث ليلة غدا وغدا تسمعون يا اخوان ما يأتي في بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على سيد ولد عدنان انتهى الجزء السادس من سيرة اسد الفوارس ويليه السابع"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام على سيد المرسلين سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين قال الراوي ثم قال اسد الفارس الغارس الريبال اريد ان اخذ معي الفوارس والابطال ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Sixth of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.16', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover, "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', "Binding: Fiber boards covered in now dull yellow paper with cream textile over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in bright pink coated paper ; hinges in recycled paper (ms. 'waste') ; numeral ١٦ (indicating volume number) inscribed on upper and lower covers ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, four and six stations ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, staining, losses of paper, creasing and minor losses to boards , etc.", "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.2, etc.).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', "Collation: VIII (16), VII (30), VIII (46), VIII+1 (63) ; octonions (one anonmalous) and a septenion ; final leaf left blank (serves as a 'flyleaf') ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "فظهرت الامور الناطقات فالتقت الى والليل امسا والحديث ليلة غدا وغدا تسمعون يا اخوان ما يأتي في بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على سيد ولد عدنان انتهى الجزء السادس عشر من سيرة اسد الفوارس ويليه الجزء السابع عشر باذن خالق البشر"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام على سيد المرسلين سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين قال الراوي فقال ذلك الرجل لزرقان نحن من مدينة خراخير وملكنا اسمه خوار ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Sixteenth of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.9', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover, "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', 'Binding: Fiber boards covered in a dull yellow paper with cream textile now over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted wove paper ; numeral ٩ (indicating volume number) inscribed on upper and lower covers ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, mainly four but also seven stations ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, staining, losses of paper, upper board cracked, etc.', "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.2, 4, 122, etc.).", "Decoration: Transfer picture of iris-like flower with stems and leaves on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', 'Collation: VIII (16), VII (30), VIII (46), VIII+1 (63) ; octonions (one anonmalous) and a septenion ; final leaf left blank (serves as a ’flyleaf’) ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "ان عساكري اكثر من هذه الرمال وان ما تحذر والليل امسى والحديث ليلة غدا وغدا تسمعون يا اخوان ما يأتي في بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على سيد ولد عدنان انتهى الجزء التاسع من سيرة اسد الفوارس ويليه العاشر"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام على سيد المرسلين سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه واهل بيته اجمعين قال الراوي وما زال الحرب يعمد حتى الى النهار ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Ninth of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 3', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper may suggest 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 64. Kuran XXIX."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in paper, interior of fore edge flap in blue silk ; upper and lower cover bear simple blind-tooled design of circles and lines along with border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; paper label on cover reads "الجزء التاسع والعشرون ٢٩" ; sewn in magenta thread, four stations ; in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, and moisture damage ; lifting and cracking of spine leather.', 'Support: European laid paper with chain lines running horizontally spaced 26 mm. apart and laid lines spaced roughly 10 laid lines per cm. ; watermarks include eagle, wings and legs spread, with "B G" below alternating with scrollwork or coat of arms with crown above and inside lion rampant (?) ; some ink and leather burn.', 'Decoration: Illuminated marginal rosette with vertical stalk accents marks the opening of this juzʼ ; textual dividers in the form of gold discs mark verse endings ; written area framed by a heavy gold band flanked with black fillets ; simple rectangular panels bear each sūrah heading (often flanking the basmalah) in gold-framed cartouche ; empty tailpiece appears at close on fol.14a (p.27) ; text rubricated with sūrah headings, sigla (namely "ط" for "مطلق" to mark pauses) and other abbreviations, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Ottoman hand (?) ; partially seriffed with tear-drop head serif on shafts for lām, ṭāʼ, etc. but not free-standing alif ; point of final nūn often joined to bowl ; slight effect of tilt to the left ; graceful but heavy line ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: VII (14) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil supplied during digitization.', 'Title from label on upper cover.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the twenty-ninth juzʼ of the Qurʼān (Juz' al-Mulk, aw Juzʼ Tabāraka) which together with Isl. Ms. 2 forms part of a multi-volume muṣḥaf with each juzʼ bound in a single volume. As expected, opens with Sūrat al-Mulk verse 1 (67:1) and closes with Sūrat al-Mursalāt verse 50 (77:50)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.19', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover, "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', 'Binding: Fiber boards covered in a dull yellow paper with cream textile now over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted paper ; numeral ١٩ (indicating volume number) inscribed on upper and lower covers ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, four stations ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, staining, losses of paper, etc.', "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.4, etc.).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', "Collation: 2 VIII(32), VII (46), VIII+1 (63) ; octonions (one anonmalous) and a septenion ; final leaf left blank (serves as a 'flyleaf') ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "ومخلي الاعداء عن السروج انتهى الجزء التاسع عشر من سيرة فارس العراق ويليه الجزء العشرون عن قريب باذن الملك المجيب وبه بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على سيد ولد عدنان م"', 'Incipit: "وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد النبي الامي وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم قال الراوي فما زال سائر قاهر الدشمان ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Nineteenth of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.3', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From verso of opening leaf (p.2), "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', 'Binding: Lacks cover, though spine carries traces of reinforcements in paper ; numeral ٣ (indicating volume number) inscribed on outer leaves ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, mainly four stations ; overall in fair condition despite lacking cover, with staining, some tears, etc.', "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.4, 6, 13, 14, 122, etc.).", 'Decoration: Transfer picture of large flower with stems and leaves on ’title page’ (p.3).', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', 'Collation: VI (12), 5 V(62) ; chiefly quinions ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly repeats twice p.46 and p.47).', 'Explicit: "اسمي اسد والفوارس كنيتي وابي جودر ما به خفيا والليل امسى والحديث ليلة غدا وغدا تسمعون يا كرام ما يأتي في بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على بدر التمام ومصباح الظلام انتهى الجزء الثالث من سيرة اسد الفوارس ويليه الرابع"', 'Incipit: "وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد النبي الامي وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم قال الراوي يا سارة يا كرام صلوا على بدر التمام ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3) (since altered, but visible beneath).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Third of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.23', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of lower cover (inverted), "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', "Binding: Fiber boards covered in a now dull yellow paper with cream textile over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; upper board lining in untinted paper, lower board lining in bright pink coated paper ; hinges in recycled paper (ms. 'waste') ; numeral ٢٣ (indicating volume number) inscribed on upper and lower covers ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, four stations ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, staining, losses of paper, etc.", "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.6, etc.).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', "Collation: VIII (16), VII (30), VIII (46), VIII+1 (63) ; octonions (one anomalous) and a septenion ; final leaf left blank (serves as a 'flyleaf') ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: " انتهى الجزء الثالث والعشرون من سيرة فارس العراق من زلزل سائر الافاق الفارس الممارس الملك اسد الفوارس ويليه الجزء الرابع والعشرون وبه يأتي بقية الكلام واصلي على النبي العدنان"', 'Incipit: "وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد النبي الامي وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم قال الراوي لما سبق الكلام بالشعر والنظام ..."', "Title 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Twenty-third of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.13', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover, "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', "Binding: Fiber boards covered in a dull yellow paper with cream textile now over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; upper board lining in untinted wove paper, lower board lining in bright pink coated paper ; hinges in recycled paper (ms. 'waste') ; numeral ١٣ (indicating volume number) inscribed on upper and lower covers ; overall in somewhat condition with abrasion, staining, losses of paper, losses to boards, hole in upper cover, losses to final leaf, etc. ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, mainly four stations ; opening leaf now covered in pages from a calendar (printed 'waste').", "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.10, etc.).", "Decoration: Transfer picture of horse on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', "Collation: 2 VIII(32), VII (46), VIII+1 (63) ; octonions (one anonmalous) and a septenion ; final leaf left blank (serves as a 'flyleaf') ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "فطلع منه النار كوهيج الشعلان وضرب به عبد المسيح في صدره والليل امسا وصارت الليلة غلسى والحديث ليلة غدا وغدا يا اخوان يأتي في بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على سيد ولد عدنان وبدر التمام انتهى الجزء الثالث عشر من سيرة الملك اسد الفوارس ويليه الرابع عشر م"', 'Incipit: "اللهم صل وسلم وبارك على سيدنا محمد النبي الامي وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم قال الراوي نجد ابن هشام راوي هذا الكلام كما سبق معنا ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Thirteenth of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Scrollwork with 3 lions rampant; scrollwork shield with initials DC in roman; scrollwork with lion rampant; scrollwork with lotus (?); initials GBA in roman; scrollwork with GIUSEPPE in roman; VICO in roman. For the first see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), no. 3737.', 'Contains logarithmic tables.', 'Text rubricated; marginal corrections in hand of author/copyist; marginal notes in another hand.', 'al-ithnayn al-mubārak salkh Dhī al-Qaʻdah sanat 1239 [27 July 1824] ʻalá yad kātibihi al-mutarjim al-madhkūr.', 'Date, provenance, name of copyist, and source of copy in colophon: wa-hādhā ākhir mā yasurruhu al-mawlá al-karīm min tarjamat hādhā al-majmūʻ al-ʻaẓīm wa-dhālika bi-naqlihi min al-lughah al-iṭāliyānīyah ilá al-lughah al-ʻarabīyah wa-ḥaṣala dhālika wa-tamma bi-al-madrasah allatī anshaʾahā walī al-niʻam tarjamah ʻalá yad al-faqīr al-ḥaqīr Aḥmad al-Ṭabbākh laṭafa bi-hi al-ḥukm al-khayr fa-kāna al-farāgh min tabyīḍihi baʻd naqlihi ilá musawwadah min aṣlihi yawm', "Questions about the fundamentals of mathematics with their answers. Translated by the author from an Italian original while he was an instructor at the Dār al-Handasah. The introduction mentions Muḥammad ʻAlī and the scholl's director, ʻUthmān Nūr al-Dīn Afandī. See James Heyworth-Dunne, An Introduction to the History of Education in Modern Egypt (London, 1938), pp. 108-109."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.8', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover, "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', 'Binding: Fiber boards once covered with a bright pink coated paper (now much of pigment and some paper lost) with cream textile now over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted paper ; numeral ٨ (indicating volume number) inscribed on upper and lower covers ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, mainly four but also seven stations ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, staining, losses of paper, losses to boards, etc.', "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.6, 34, 114, etc.).", "Decoration: Transfer picture of a poppy-like flower with stems and leaves on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', "Collation: VI (12), 4 V(52), V+1 (63) ; chiefly quinions ; opening and final leaves left blank (serve as 'flyleaves') ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "ووقعت الاحرار [؟] تصهل وسؤالها لم يقبل حتى ولي النهار وارتحل واقبل والليل امسى والحديث ليلة غدا وصارت الليلة غلسي [؟] وغدا تسمعون يا اخوان ما يأتي في بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على سيد ولد عدنان انتهى الجزء الثامن من سيرة اسد الفوارس ويليه التاسع"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الواحد الاحد الفرد الصمد الذي سلط الجبابرة على من عند وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد رسول ربنا الذي اهلك كل من تمرد ورضي الله عن اصحابه الكرام ... قال الراوي ...."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Eighth of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.18', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From verso of opening leaf (p.2), "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', 'Binding: Lacks cover ; numeral ١٨ (indicating volume number) inscribed on outer leaves ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, four, five, etc. stations ; overall in fair condition despite lacking cover, with staining, some tears, etc.', "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.2, etc.).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', "Collation: VIII (16), VII (30), VIII (46), VIII+1 (63) ; octonions (one anonmalous) and a septenion ; final leaf left blank (serves as a 'flyleaf') ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes outerleaves and follows p.39 with p.39A, 39B, 40, etc. likely to recover from skipping two pages).", 'Explicit: "واما ما كان من امر قاهر الدشمان فانه دخل ذلك القلعة فاذا هي من البلور وبواسطها روضة في الرياض انتهى الجزء الثامن عشر من سيرة الملك اسد الفوارس ويليه الجزء التاسع عشر عن قريب باذن الملك المجيب وبه يأتي في بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على بدر التمام ومصباح الظلام ورسول الملك العلام م"', 'Incipit: "وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد النبي الامي وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين وبيدي اليمانى ... قال الراوي ولما فرغ قاهر الدشمان من كلامه ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Eighteenth of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 532 v.2', 'Origin: As appears in authorial colophon on fol.305a-305b, composition finished ("kāna intahá tasṭīruh...") in the afternoon of Thursday, 29 Jumādá I 1003 [ca. 9 February 1595]. As appears in scribal colophon on fol.305b, copied by ʻAlī ibn al-Shaykh ʻAlī ibn al-Shaykh Ḥasan ibn al-Shaykh ʻAlī ibn al-Shaykh ʻUmar al-ʻAmmūrī [ʻUmūrī] al-Mālikī al-Azharī. Copying finished ("wa-kāna al-farāgh min hādhihi al-nuskhah al-sharīfah...") Sunday into Monday, 10th of Ṣafar 1132 [ca. 23 December 1719].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inscription on inner front cover and label on foreedge flap "IL 174" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboard covered in dark brown leather, with light brown leather and red goatskin used for repairs ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings and interior of envelope flap in pink laid paper ; interior of fore edge flap in light brown leather ; upper and lower covers carry large blind-tooled (with leather onlays) central mandorla (compare Déroche class. OAi 4) ; smaller, rounder blind-tooled panel appears on envelope flap (compare Déroche class. OAi2 2) ; in fair condition.', "Support: European laid paper ; very clear single chain lines, running vertically and evently spaced 24 mm. apart ; laid lines running horizontally and spaced roughly 10 laid lines per cm ; paper used in repair of fol.1 bears embossed mark ('imitation watermark') ; some ink burn.", 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) accompanies opening on fol.1b, nearly identical to that found in first volume (Isl. Ms. 532 v.1) but more expertly drawn and painted ; consists of rectangular panel containing an empty cartouche in gold flanked by angular vegetal accents in red, gold, and blue; rectangular panel is surmounted by well with semi-circular piece (effectively dome within dome) evoking the miḥrāb filled with vegetal design in gold, blue, and red, outlining in black ; gold rule-border on incipit and facing page (misplaced and found after fol.8 (p.16), with red rule-borders throughout thereafter ; occasional textual dividers in the form of red discs and three dots ; keywords such as "قوله", notabilia, and section headings rubricated ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, compact Egyptian hand ; seriffed with small right-sloping serifs on free standing alif, lām, ṭāʼ, etc., curvilinear though somewhat flattened descenders, pointing mainly in distinct dots, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf) ; same hand appears in first volume.', 'Layout: Written in 39 lines per page ; mainly single column, though occasionally in two columns where poetry is transcribed ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 30 V (300), II+1 (305) ; quinions followed by binion with added leaf ; leaf foliated ۳۰۰ (note gold rule-border) should follow the incipit page but has been mistakenly inserted after fol.8 (p.16) ; final flyleaf likely removed to serve as pastedown in the rebind of the first volume (see Isl. Ms. 532 v.1) ; location of lacunae in the exemplar (model) are marked "بياض بالاصل" or "بياض بالاصل هنا" or the interesting logograph "بض بص" in the margin (see fol.79a, 196a, 200a, 213b, 216b, etc.) though a gap in the text is not always left, a bāʼ hindīyah serves as a signes-de-renvoi to mark where the gap had appeared in the exemplar ; quire numbering in red ink in the form of full words through quire 19, thereafter in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals surmounted by the letter kāf (compare quire numbering of first volume) ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, begins with "۳۰۰", continuing the foliation of the first volume ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (referenced in cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," rectangular followed by "scribal," triangular, reads: "وهذا اخر ما قصدناه وتوجيناه من التعليق على الاذكار النووية ... قال مولفه ... كان انتهى تسطيره بعد ظهر يوم الخميس التاسع والعشرون من جمادى الاولى سنة ثلاث والف. وكان الفراغ من هذه النسخة الشريفة يوم الاحد المبارك مع ليلة الاثنين الموافق لعاشر شهر صفر الخير سنة اثنين وثلاثين ومائة والف على يد كاتبها افرق العباد واحوجهم الى رب الارباب علي بن الشيخ علي ابن الشيخ حسن بن الشيخ علي بن الشيخ عمر العموري المالكي مذهبا الازهري غفر الله له ولوالديه ولجميع المسلمين امين وسلام على المرسلين والحمد لله رب العالمين والحمد لله وحده ان تجد عيبا فسد الخللا جل من لا فيه عيب وعلا وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل"', 'Explicit: "وخلاف مقتضى صحة هذه الاجازة واي فائدة اذا لم يروها انتهى قلت وقد اجاز لذلك [كذا] ابن حجر الهيتمي في اخرين"', 'Incipit: "وبه ثقتي كتاب الاذكار في صلوات مخصوصة باب الاذكار المستحبة يوم الجمعة و ليلتها والدعا قوله"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Second volume of Ibn ʻAllān's commentary on Ḥilyat al-abrār wa shiʻār al-akhyār, or al-Adhkār al-Nawawīyah, a work of prayers compiled from traditions by Muḥyī al-Dīn Abū Zakarīyā Yaḥyá ibn Sharaf al-Nawawī (d. 676/1277)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 60', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.747, copied by ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Qāsim ibn Aḥmad ibn Ismāʻīl ibn Khalīl ibn Yūnis al-Malaṭī. Transcription finished ("wa-qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min kitābat al-juzʼ al-thānī min al-ʻInāyah fī sharḥ al-Hidāyah...") in the mausoleum (turbah, türbe) of Amīr Yashbak in Cairo, 1st of Ramaḍān 889 [ca. 22 September 1484]. As appears in reading / study note in red ink adjacent to colophon on p.747, overlining in red completed Monday, 14 Rajab 1056 [ca. 26 August 1646] "يقول الفقير عبد الرحمن الحمد لله الذي شرفني بمطالعة هذا الكتاب وميزت الهداية عن العناية بوضع المداد الاحمر واتممت عند انتصاف النهار يوم الاثنين الرابع عشر من شهر رجب المرجب من شهور سنة ست وخمسين والف ...".', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 57. Al-Inayah."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark green-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though completely detached) ; doublures in red leather ; upper and lower covers carry large blind-stamped mandorla with vegetal composition (compare Déroche class. NA 4) along with tooled and gold-painted roll border ; sewn in blue thread, two stations ; endbands in faded pink and cream, soiled but intact ; in poor condition with much abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather at fore-edge flap, etc. ; flap is completely detached at fore-edge.', 'Support: non-European (Arab) laid paper with chain lines grouped in threes (vertical) with 9-12 mm. between the chains and 31-42 mm. between the groups ; well-burnished ; front flyleaves in European laid paper with anchor in circle (trefoil above) watermark ; added table of contents on leaves of European laid paper with grapes, crown, band watermark ; back flyleaves in European laid paper with crossbow in circle (trefoil above) watermark.', 'Decoration: Section headings and keywords rubricated ; text being commented upon overlined in red ; written area surrounded by red rule-border ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh with influence of nastaʻlīq ; clear Egyptian or Turkish hand (?) ; virtually serifless ; strong effect of tilt to the right ; mainly closed counters ; hand changes pp.297-312, even more reminiscent of nastaʻlīq, thinner line.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, III (6), i, V-1 (15), 35 V(365), V-1 (374), ii ; chiefly quinions ; final two leaves ruled but left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (begins with ۱ on page facing incipit page/p.19, ends with ۳٦٤) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during digitization, includes flyleaves, drops at p.300 and reappears at p.381 without mistake).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "وقد وقع الفراغ من كتابة الجزء الثاني من العناية في شرح الهداية للشيخ الامام العالم العلامة الشيخ اكمل الدين تغمده الله برحمته واسكنه في فسيح جنته بعون الله وحسن توفيقه والصلوة على نبيه محمد وآله بالقاهرة المحروسة حماها الله عن الافات والعاهات في تربة الامير المرحوم يشبك الدوادار الكبير ... على يدا [كذا] احقر عباد الله واحوجهم وافقر مخلوقاته واضعفهم الراجي رحمة ربه الكريم وذي المن والفضل الجسيم عبد الرحمن بن المرحوم قاسم بن المرحوم احمد بن اسماعيل بن خليل بن يونس الملطي غفر الله له ولوالديه ولمن نظر فيه ودعا لهم ولجميع المسلمين اجمعين امين يا رب العالمين والحمد لله على اتمامه بمنه وكرمه وذلك غرة شهر رمضان المعظم سنة ۸۸۹"', 'Explicit: "ان الرجل اذا لم يكن معه الا ثوب نجس فان كان ثلاثة ارباعه نجسا وربعه طاهرا فيصلي فيه ولا يصلي عريانا بالاجماع فلما جازت صلوته وهو نجس بيقين فلان يجوز بالتحري حالة الاشتباه اولي والله اعلم بالصواب واليه المعاد والمآب"', 'Incipit: "اللهم اعني على اتمامه كتاب البيوع لما فرغ من ذكر انواع حقوق الله وذكر بعض حقوق العباد شرع في بيان ما بقي منها ..."', 'Title from colophon.', 'Ms. codex.', "Second volume, comprising the text from Kitāb al-Buyūʻ to Kitāb al-Khunthá, from Akmal al-Dīn al-Bābartī's commentary on al-Hidāyah, a commentary by ʻAlī ibn Abī Bakr al-Marghīnānī (d. 593/1197) on his compendium of Ḥanafī law, Bidāyat al-mubtadiʼ fī furūʻ al-fiqh al-Ḥanafī. Includes added table of contents (inserted between front flyleaves)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 942', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.561, copied by ʻAlī al-Buyūtī [?] al-Shāfiʻī with transcription completed 16 Ṣafar 1145 [August 1732].', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 91', 'Binding: Boards covered in black cloth with tan (green in some areas) leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in beige wove paper ; spine label carries title, author, and inventory number "جزء من التفسير الكبير ... الحسن البكرى سبط ال ... مجلد واحد ٨٣" ; still another spine label (near the tail) carries another inventory number "٢٨" ; edges of text block flecked with blue ; sewn in white thread over three recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands in red ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark with small six-pointed star (partially visible in many leaves, see pp.10, 12, 14, 18, 24, 58, 162, etc.), sturdy, crisp and well-burnished to glossy, cream in color ; some staining.', 'Decoration: Keywords and Qurʼānic text being commented upon rubricated ; written area surrounded by red double rule-border.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, compact Egyptian hand in a medium line ; serifless with only slight effect of tilt to the left, pointing in distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ, kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred.', 'Layout: Written in 33 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V-1 (9), 5 V(59), IV (67), 21 V(277), 4 (281), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تم التفسير بحمد الله تعالى ومعونته وحسن توفيقه وكان الفراغ من هذه النسخة الشريفة المباركة في يوم السبت المبارك ساتت [كذا] عشر شهر صفر الخير من شهور سنة الف ومائة وخمسة واربعين [مشطوبة] من بعد الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلاة واتم السلام وذلك على يد علي البيوتي الشافعي غفر الله له ولوالديه ولجميع المسلمين اجمعين والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Explicit: "في جميع احوالنا واعف عنا عفوا شاملا لذنوبنا يا ارحم الراحمين"', 'Incipit: "الى كعب الاحبار كيف يجد الشمس تغرب قال في ماء وطين كذلك تجده في التورية ووجد عندها عند تلك العين قوما قيل كان لباسهم جلود الوحش ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of what appears to be the second volume of al-Bayḍāwī's famous commentary on the Qurʼān, opening with Sūrat al-Kahf (18) verse 86, but due to a note on the incipit page (p.1) attributed to Abū al-Ḥasan Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Bakrī al-Ṣiddīqī (d.1545) who composed several commentaries, one of which is entitled Tashīl al-sabīl fī fahm maʻānī al-tanzīl. Contributions to the examination and description of this manuscript provided by Ahmad Nazir Atassi."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 11 v.2', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; paper suggests early 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Several inserted slips carrying notes (paginated pp.55-56, 149-150, 241-242, 313-314, 365-366, 357-358) and folded document (paginated pp. 815-816).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 28 Abu Suud\'s Commentary on Kuran. Vol. 2." ; "٦٠" on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather now overlaid with laid marbled paper (blue, pink, yellow, etc.) ; spine repaired with two pieces of red leather ; Type II binding (though flap now lost) ; upper and lower board linings in light green laid paper stamped with floral design ; traces of stamped mandorla in leather under marbled paper ; sewn in dark brown thread, four stations ; worked chevron endbands in blue, salmon and yellow, mostly intact at head and tail ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of paper, boards delaminating at corners, leather on spine showing some splitting and red rot, etc. otherwise sound.', "Support: European laid paper mainly with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 20 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of man with stick over his shoulder in circle ; flyleaves in a different European laid paper with chain lines spaced 30 mm. apart (vertical) and three hats and 'L V' in circle watermarks ; several older repairs, tide-lines and cockled pages especially at front of codex.", 'Decoration: Sūrah headings rubricated or in blue ink, also often overlined in red ; textual dividers in the form of red and blue discs appear on page facing incipit page and following page.', 'Script: Naskh ; mainly a clear Syrian hand, virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, many closed counters, curvilinear descenders, occasional superscripting of final words or letters of line, and pointing mainly in distinct dots, extensively vocalized ; more compact from p.567 on ; pp.681-684 supplied in a different hand, namely an elegant Ottoman naskh, partially seriffed, with effect of tilt to the left, mainly open counters, superscripting of final letters of words, and some elongation of horizontal strokes ; sūrah headings often in a larger tawqīʻ script.', 'Layout: Written in 29 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV-1 (7), V+2 (19), 2 V(39), IV (47), 10 V(147), 2 IV(163), 3 V(193), IV (201), 4 V(241), IV (249), 2 V(269), IV (277), III-1 (282), 10 V(382), IV (390), 3 V(420), IV (428), 3 V(458), III+2 (466), 2 V(486), V+1 (497), II (501), i ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf and inserts ; skips two pages each between pp.109-110, pp.217-218, pp.271-272, pp.415-416, pp.521-522 and pp.575-576).', 'Colophon: "Authorial" and "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "كتب المؤلف عفى الله تعالى عنه في اخر نسخة الاصل اتفق الفراغ من تسويدها تيك الاوراق بتوفيق الله عز سلطانه ليلة الجمعة الاولى من شهر الله الحرام رجب الفرد لعام ٩٧٣ حامدا لله رب العالمين ومصليا على سيده محمد صلى الله تعالى عليه و على سائر الانبياء والمرسلين والملائكة المقربين اجمعين"', 'Explicit: "واشرف ايامي يوم القاك يوم يقوم الناس لرب العالمين فريقا فريقا احشرين مع الذين انعمت عليهم من النبيين والصديقين الشهداء والصالحين وحسن اولئك رفيقا"', 'Incipit: "اتى امر الله اي الساعة او ما يعمه وغيرها من العذاب الموعود للكفرة عبر عن ذلك بامر الله تعالى للتفخيم وتهويل وللايذان بان تحققه في نفسه"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of an odd second volume of Abū al-Suʻūd's commentary on the Qurʼān, beginning with Sūrat al-Naḥl (16) and ending with Sūrat al-Nās (114). See Mich. Isl. Ms. 11 v.1 for first volume. Description provided mainly by Sarah Mirza."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 16', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.174a (p.349), copied by Muṣṭafá ibn ʻĪsá ibn Aḥmad. Transcription completed ("waqaʻa al-farāgh min taḥrīr hādhihi al-nuskhah al-sharīfah...") before noon on Thursday, 21st of Muḥarram 886 [ca. 21 March 1481]. Ownership statement below the colophon reveals that the copyist hails from al-Jabal al-Aqraʻ in the Syrian province of Latakia (Lādhiqīyah).', 'Accompanying materials: a. slip of European laid paper with inscriptions in black ink inserted after p.110 -- b. scrap of paper with inscription in black ink inserted after p.260.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 130. Khulasat al-fatawi."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather with spine and board edges now covered in red leather repairs ; perhaps once Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; board linings in laid paper ; upper and lower covers bear blind-tooled polylobed central medallion with band formed from a series of interlocking s-shaped stamps and floral/star motif at the center, all with gold-tooled accents as well as a lined corner pieces and a multi-banded border consisting of a series of s-shaped stamps and cross-shaped stamps ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in green and red (burnt orange) ; in poor condition with lifting of leather, abrasion, water damage, staning, and extreme negative draw (warping) in upper cover.', 'Support: non-European (Arab) laid paper with laid lines running horizontally, distinct but faint, spaced roughly 9 laid lines per cm., chain lines grouped in threes running vertically with roughly 8-10 mm. between the chains and 45 mm. between groups ; very thick, smooth and only lightly burnished ; ink/tar damage along tail of text block ; staining, accretions, and minor pest damage ; a few repairs in European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with section headings in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Syrian hand ; virtually sans serif ; mainly closed counters ; pointing for letters such as tāʼ, qāf, etc. (two dots) appears as inverted caret ; alif of lām alif ligature forms a loop ; strong vertical character though with slight effect of words descending to baseline.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V-1 (9), 16 V(169), 1+II (174) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present, though often obscured ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, begins with ۲ on fol.2, continues accurately and concludes with ۱۷۴ ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between pp.161-162, two inserted slips numbered).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "وقع الفراغ من تحرير هذه النسخة الشريفة قبل الظهر في [؟] يوم الخميس في احدى وعشرين في شهر المحرم في تاريخ ستة وثمانين وثمانمائة على يد العبد الضعيف الراجي رحمة ربه اللطيف مصطفى بن الفقيه عيسى بن الفقيه احمد غفر الله لهم ولوالديهم ولجميع المسلمين والمسلمات والمؤمنين والمؤمنات والحمد لله رب العالمين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين"', 'Explicit: "بان قال [؟] طلبت الشفعة واخترت او على القلب يجوز الاول منهما ويبطل الثاني لانه يمكنها ان يقول [كذا] طلبتهما الشفعة والخيار"', 'Incipit: "كتاب الاجازة مشتمل على احد عشر فصل الاول في المقدمة وفيها وجوب الاجازة ومسائل حق الحبس الثاني في..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on fol.1a (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Second volume of the collection of Ḥanafī fatwas by Ṭāhir ibn ʻAbd al-Rashīd al-Bukhārī.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 519', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon but may be 15th century as suggested by paper.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slips in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL151" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in burnished and colored paper ; Type II binding (once with flap, though now missing) ; resewn ; endbands lacking ; in poor condition with much wear and abrasion ; some moisture damage ; boards delaminating ; numerous leather repairs ; lower cover detaching at spine ; entire flap missing ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European laid paper ; chain lines running horizontally appear to be grouped in threes with roughly 11-12 mm. between the chain lines and roughly 45 mm. between groups ; laid lines running vertically with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. ; rather thick and burnished ; a number of leaves are delaminating.', 'Decoration: Textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red ; text rubricated with section headings, subsection headings, keywords, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Syrian or Egyptian hand ; sans serif ; alif maqṣūrah is often with dots ; freely ligatured with lām and alif almost always joined from above (looking like inverted "U") and dāl and rāʼ joined to following hāʼ; bar of kāf often missing ; alif of قال often arches over qāf supplying otherwise absent pointing ; swooping final nūn looking more like elongated rāʼ ; occasional vocalization without consistency.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V-1 (9), V(19), V-4 (25), 5 V(75), VI(87), 4 V(127), 2 VI(151), 2 V(171), V-8 (173), 3 V(203), IV(211), 6 V(271), V-1 (280), IV-6 (282) ; chiefly quinions, though several irregular quires and missing leaves ; Hindu-Arabic numerals appearing near the beginning of each quire seem to provide quire numbering ; catchwords present, though occasionally cut off or missing ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: " اخواني ان الله تعالى ارحم والطف ما يكون بعبده اذا نزل في لحده ووضع خشن التراب على لين خده وجفاه من كان يرغب في قربه ووده فاذا وضع الميت على المغتسل وجرد من اثوابه وايس من أحبابه فينادي واسوتاه [واسوأتاه] وافضيحتاه ولا يسمع نداه غير مولاه"', 'Incipit: "الفصل الثامن والعشرون في مناقب الفقهاء رضي الله عنهم اجمعين الحمد لله المعروف بالقدم قبل وجود الوجود الموصوف بالكرم والفضل والجود المنزه في وحدانيته عن الابنا والابآء والجدود المقدس عن الصاحبة والمصحوب والوالد والمولود"', 'Title from inscription on fol.1a (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Early copy of the second part of a work of pious devotions (anecdotes of holy men, homilies, traditions, etc.) attributed to the popular saint al-Ḥurayfīsh. End wanting. Description provided by Maxim Romanov.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 495', "Origin: As appears in the audition statements on the margins of fol.9a (p.17) and fol.19a (p. 37), and fol. 36b (p. 72) seemingly copied by al-Ḥasan ibn ʻAlī ibn ʻĪsá ibn al-Ḥasan al-Lakhmī, who died in the year 699 [1299 or 1300] in Cairo. Either this copy or its exemplar appears to have been authorized by al-Ḥasan ibn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Bakrī al-Taymī al-Nīshābūrī thumma al-Dimashqī (d.656 in Cairo). Thus, the ms. was very likely copied in the mid to late 13th century. The audition statement/ijāzah in the margin of fol.19b (p.38) appears to be in the hand of al-Lakhmī's son Aḥmad.", 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From spine label and inscription on interior of upper cover, "IL 162" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black cloth and black leather (modern Western quarter binding) ; board linings in sky blue paper ; in good condition.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper, approx. 32 mm for 20 vertical laidlines ; chainlines are difficult to estblish definitively ; on fol. 13a (p.25) there appear to be 5 sets of 2 chainlines, with 7-9mm between chainlines and 25-40 between sets.', 'Decoration: Lacks decoration or rubrication ; ink has faded to brown.', 'Script: Naskh ; one main hand, Egyptian (?) ; serrifed with a prominent rightward tear-drop serif on free-standing alif ; the lām-alif al-muḥaqqaqah is often used ; counters are inconsistent ; kāf often lacks bar ; mainly pointed ; audition statements, etc. are unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V-5 (5), V-6 (9), 7 V(79) ; chiefly quinions ; foliation in Hindu-Arabic numerals attests to the fragmentary nature of the present artifact ; catchwords lacking ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "كتبه لنفسه الحسن بن علي بن عيسى بن الحسن اللخمي ..."', 'Explicit: "باب الحلف بالأنداد حدثنا ابو داود ثن الحسن بن علي قال ثنا عبد الرزاق قال أخبرنا معمر عن الزهري عن حميد بن عبد الرحمن عن أبي هريرة قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم من حلف فقال في حلفه واللات فليقل لا إله إلا الله ومن قال لصاحبه تعال أقامرك فليتصدق بشىء"', 'Incipit: "فأحكم الله عن ذلك ونهى عن ذلك حدثنا ابو داود ثنا أحمد بن شبوية المروزي ثنا عبد الله بن عثمان عن عيسى بن عبيد عن عبيد الله مولى عمر عن الضحاك بمعناه قال فوعظ الله [ في ] ذلك باب في الاستئمار "', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine early copy of a section of Abū Dāʼūd's Sunan, from roughly the middle of Kitāb al-Nikāḥ (just before Bāb fī al-istiʼmār) to the early part of Kitāb al-īmān wa-al-nudhūr (Bāb al-Ḥalf bi-al-andād). Description provided by Noah Gardiner."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 464', 'Origin: Colophon provides no information on copyist or date of copying ; paper suggests late 13th or 14th century. An ownership notice below the colophon on fol.157b (p.316) appears to be dated 709 [1309 or 10] and provides a rough terminus ante quem.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, "IL 353" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry tooled central circular decoration (shamsah) with neither lobed edge nor pendants but filled with geometric interlace forming an octagonal pattern incorporating epigraphic stamps (compare Weisweiler 17-20) ; these stamps are repeated at the four corners of the elaborate blind-stamped border consisting of a series of vegetal stamps separated by incised fillets (compare no.31 as well as nos. 32-35 in Bosch, et al.) ; sewn in yellow then blue thread, two stations ; headband gone, tailband in blue largely survies ; in poor condition ; upper cover is extremely worn and has suffered losses ; spine has been partially repaired with a red, fabric-based tape ; portion of fore-edge flap remains, though it has been covered with a different brown leather, as has the rest of the spine ; threads of the first few quires are loose.', 'Support: non-European (Arab?) laid paper, the lines of which are difficult to describe neatly ; horizontal laid lines 20 in roughly 27 mm. ; chain lines may be sets of three and two, with chains spaced 12-15 mm. apart, distance between the groups is difficult to discern.', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with section headings and keywords (e.g. "المسئلة الخامسة" or "قوله تعالى") in red ; three circles and single circles appearing in margin (likely collation marks) also in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Yemeni hand (?) ; unvocalized and very casually pointed ; most notable for the frequent horizontal elongation of letters, e.g. sīn within a word, tāʼ, thāʼ, and bāʼ at the ends of words, etc. ; descenders are often quite elongated and curvilinear and final descender letters (ahdāb) are often disproportionately larger than other letters.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V-1 (9), III (15), 14 V(155), I (157), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present, appear throughout the first quire, in all subsequent quires appear only on the verso of the final leaf of each quire ; catchword at fol.115b (p.232) does not match with what follows, which may indicate a missing quire ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads: "تم الجزء الثاني بحمد الله ومنه وفضله ويتلوه [؟] في الجزء الثالث قوله سبحانه وتعالى حيث ما كنتم قولوا وجوهكم سطره والحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة على اشرف المرسلين محمد خاتم النبيين واله وصحبه اجمعين وسلم تسليما كثيرا"', 'Explicit: "المسألة الثانية عشرة إذا توجه إلى جهة ثم تغير اجتهاده وهو في الصلاة فعليه أن ينحرف ويتحول ويبني لأن عارض الاجتهاد لا يبطل السابق، فكذلك فيمن صدق مخبراً ثم جاء آخر نفسه إليه أسكن فأخبره بخلافه، فهذا ما يتعلق بالمسائل المستنبطة من هذه الآية في حكم الاستقبال والله أعلم"', 'Incipit: "قوله تعالى الم فيه مسألتين المسألة الاولى اعلم ان الالفاظ التي يتهجي بها اسماء مسمياتها الحروف المبسوطة"', "Title from 'title page' fol.1a (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of a second volume of al-Rāzī's celebrated commentary on the Qurʼān, from the opening of Sūrat al-Baqarah (2) through verse 144. Description provided by Noah Gardiner."])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Three crescents. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Text rubricated; finding aids and marginal corrections in hand of copyist.', 'Discusses three different calendrical systems: Arabic, Byzantine, and Coptic, and the astrological significance of their days and months for harvests, the rising and falling of the Nile, and historical events.', '"A treatise on astrology arranged in 2 bābs." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 100.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 258', 'Origin: No details on date of transcription or copyist supplied in text. Hand, paper, etc. would suggest late 18th or 19th century.', 'Former shelfmark: Pasted label on spine "۴۷٦" ; inscription in pencil on lower pastedown "496 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" ; "85" inscribed in pencil on recto of first folio.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in deep brown leather (goat) with black leather on spine ; Type II binding (with flap) ; upper and lower covers carry gold stamped mandorla, pendants, and corner pieces filled with a vegetal design (compare Déroche class. OAi 4) bordered in a decorative pattern of tiny blind-tooled and gold painted (now green in many places) rosettes along with a decorative frame consisting of blind stamped and gold painted guilloche roll border flanked by gold fillets ; this decorative pattern carries on to the foreedge flap and envelope flap which is decorated in the same fashion as the upper and lower covers but for which the decorative work has been better preserved (a border of gold painted fillets and sprigs at the spandrels of the smaller mandorla/rosette appears on the envelope flap but not on the covers where it was likely lost) ; the foreedge flap carries gold fillets and a decorative pattern of tiny blind stamped (and gold painted) rosettes (interior of the flap as well) with guilloche roll accent at top and bottom pastedowns and flyleaves (and interior of envelope flap) in yellow laid paper (single chain lines visible, spaced 30-32 mm. apart) ; white thread ; two sewing stations ; chevron endbands in red (faded to salmon color) and yellow ; in poor to fair condition ; still well attached but with much wear ; oxidation and loss of gold paint on cover ; sever pest damage to lower cover, some to upper cover and flap as well (envelope and foreedge) ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: Pastedowns and flyleaves in laid paper with chain lines running vertically spaced roughly 30-32 mm. apart, laid lines running horizontally spaced roughly 6 laid lines per cm., quite fibrous and crisp ; first three folios (p.1-6) ruled for table of contents on a laid paper with laid lines running horizontally spaced roughly 6 laid lines per cm., sagging and undulating, quite fibrous and crisp, light brown in colour with some inclusions ; bulk of the textblock in a European laid paper with single chain lines running horizontally and spaced 25-27 mm. apart, laid lines running vertically and spaced laid lines 10-11 laid lines per cm., and watermark difficult to examine but possibly lion (even passant guardant, see p.12, 16, 18, 58, etc.) and "V G" (see p.14, etc. likely Valentino Galvani, see pp.88-89 in Walz, "The paper trade of Egypt and the Sudan" and compare Eineder nos.986, 987, etc. ), few inclusions and undissolved fibers, cream color, crisp and burnished ; still another watermark is visible in final leaves (likely of different paper type), a flower with five long petals over letters "G M" (see p.416).', 'Decoration: Decorative frame consisting of black fillets flanking a gold band is present throughout text ; initial leaves are ruled for a table of contents but unfilled ; text rubricated with chapter and section headings, overlinings, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; very small, stiff Turkish hand in heavy line ; mainly seriffed with right-sloping head serif (approaching horizontal in some instances), slight effect of inclination to the left, exaggerated thickness of many horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, point of final nūn often seated above or nearly assimilated with tall, narrow bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 33 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 3 (3), 19 V (193), VII (207), I (209), i ; mainly quinions ; catchwords supplied but lacking in many places ; opening added leaves ruled for table of contents but left blank ; final two leaves ruled but left blank ; pagination in black ink, Hindu Arabic numerals, top center of each page from opening of text to second to final folio of text, though mistakenly repeats each of the following page numbers ١٢۸, ١٢٤, ۲۹۱, ۳٥٤ ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," triangular, reads: "هذا اخر كتاب سماه الملتقى الابحر ولم ال من الالو وهو التقصير جهدا اي لم امنعك جهدا في عدم ترك شيء من مسائل الكتب الاربعة وهي القدوري والمختار والكنز والوقاية كما مر في الخطبة ... حتى يسهل الطلب على من اشتبه عليه صحة شيء مما ليس في الكتب الاربعة ... وما توفيقي الا بالله عليه توكلت واليه انيب . وقع التمام والاختتام ببلدة ادرنة صانها الله عن البلية قاضيا بالعسكر المنصور في ولاية روم ايلي المعمورة راجيا من الله عز وجل العفو مما وقع عن القصور والخبط والذلل وذلك في ليلة الخميس في اليوم التاسع وعشر من جمادى الآخر من شهور سنة سبع وسبعين الف من الهجرة النبوية من له الفرد الشرف اللهم اجعله لي ذاخرا نافعا وخيرا باقيا بحرمة جميع الانبياء والمرسلين خصوصا بحرمة حبيبك محمد المصطفى صلوات الله وسلامه عليه وعليهم اجمعين والحمد لله رب العالمين" ; "Scribal," reads: "تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب".', 'Explicit: "قال الفقير يريد المولى الفاضل روح الله روحه وزاد في أعلى غرف الجنان فتوح نفسه النفيسة"', 'Incipit: "بان يكون آدميا فهواى هذا لبيع فاسد لما فيه عن زيادة عرية عن العوض فيكون ربوا وكل عقد شرط فيه..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Second part of ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Muḥammad Shaykhʹzādah's (d.1078/1667) popular commentary on al-Ḥalabī’s Multaqá al-abḥur, a handbook of Ḥanafī fiqh, opening in Kitāb al-buyūʻ."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 568', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.461, transcription completed ("...min shughl naskhih faraghtu...") 9 Jumādá I 618 [ca. 1 July 1221] apparently for one Shihāb al-Dīn. As appears in preceding authorial colophon (p.461), composition completed 30 Muḥarram 515 [ca. 20th April 1121].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From front flyleaf and spine label "IL 394" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western-style binding (not original) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper ; spine gold-tooled with title and fillets flanking raised bands ; resewn in white thread, six stations ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, 20 in 25-26 mm.) and chain lines grouped in threes (or twos and threes) with 10-14 mm. between chains and 48-55 mm. between groups ; well-sized and burnished, quite smooth, fairly crisp and sturdy, inclusions.', 'Decoration: Section headings rubricated.', "Script: Naskh ; elegant 'Syrian' or Iraqi [?] hand in a thin to medium line, alternating large bolder lines with more compact lines ; mainly serifless (though right-sloping head-serif appears on occasional ascender) and quite rounded with curvilinear descenders (some sweeping), elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots, kāf occasionally represented by vertical stroke with miniature kāf seated atop it, extensively vocalized.", 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: ii, V-2 (8), 22 V(228), I (230), ii ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords rarely present ; quire numbering in the form of whole words in the upper outer margin of the recto of the opening leaf of each quire, mainly cut off until the ninth quire ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Authorial" reads "واتممته والحمد لله وحده صبيحة يوم السبت سلخ المحرم اوان ربيع عام خمسة عشرة وخمسمائة تاريخ عدل مقوم" ; "Scribal" reads "واني بحمد الله من شغل نسخه فرغت بتوفيق الاله المعظم عشية يوم السبت ليلة تاسع لدى جمادى الاول الشهر معلم وخمسة الاف وخمسون صورة وخمسمائة بية [بيت؟] وبالخسم يختم لفضل ... [؟] عام ثامن عشرة وستمائة تاريخ ذلك قيم وكان اتساخ امثالا وطاعة لامر شهاب الدين خير مقدم فيا رب اسعف مبتغاه معجلا وصلى على آل النبي وسلم"', 'Explicit: "وما ضر شمسا اشرقت في علوها حجود حشود وهو عن نورها عمي"', 'Incipit: "كتاب الشهادات باب ما يجوز من الشهادات وما يبطل منها بالبرأة اني لا تظم ابواب الشهادات طوعا لا فتح ابواب السعادات ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '2. p.461-p.464 : [Naẓm fī madḥ al-Nabī] / Jalāl al-Dīn al-Khuwārizmī al-ʻAlawī.', '1. p.6-p.461 : [al-Juzʼ al-thānī min Naẓm al-Jāmiʻ al-kabīr] / Aḥmad ibn Abī al-Muʼayyad al-Nasafī.', 'Elegant copy of the second part of a metrical version, with commentary, of al-Jamīʻ al-kabīr, a work on Ḥanafī law by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥasan al-Shaybānī (d.803 or 805) followed by a poem in praise of the Prophet by one Jalāl al-Dīn al-Khawārizmī al-ʻAlawī.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 89', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.351b-352b (p.712-714) composition begun in 990 and finally completed 13th [?] Dhū al-Ḥijjah 995 [ca. 14 November 1587] in al-Madrasah al-Kallāsah neighboring al-Jāmiʻ al-Umawī in Damascus. Exemplar for this ms. transcribed for the author by Raḍī al-Dīn ibn ʻAlī al-Bārizī with transcription finished Muḥarram 996 [December 1587]. No further detail on the copying of this ms. is given though paper would suggest very late 16th or very early 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Envelope with name etc. (paginated pp.73-74) -- b. Slip with writing (paginated pp.339-340) -- c. Slip of blank European paper (paginated pp.503-504).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 31. Multaka al-abhur, with commentary." ; on tail edge of text block "۷۷".', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (in several shades of blue, white, etc.) with red brown leather over spine and edges/turn-ins ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in yellow-tinted laid paper ; sewn in red thread, 2 stations ; worked endbands in cream or yellow, nearly gone ; in poor condition with lower cover completely detached and much abrasion, staining, lifting and cracking of leather.', 'Support: European laid paper with watermark anchor in circle (trefoil above, G C F countermark, compare Heawood 2 dating to 1600) ; chain lines spaced roughly 30 m. apart, laid lines 7 laid lines per cm. ; table of contents supplied on a fine blue-tinted European laid paper with watermark horn in scrollwork with crown above and "L M" below ; some thread breakage and loose quires.', 'Decoration: Text partially rubricated with section headings, keywords, text of work being commented upon, overlining, etc. in red ; diagrams accompany text on pp.198-199.', 'Script: Naskh ; several neat Syrian and Turkish hands ; virtually serifless ; first hand with mainly closed counters, kāf mabsūṭah preferred, some free assimilation of letters such as dāl followed by hāʼ, qāf followed by hāʼ, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 22-23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 14 V(140), III (146), 7 V(216), I (218), 7 V(288), V+2 (300), 3 V(330), V+2 (342), V (352) ; chiefly quinions ; fol.218b (p.444) left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in Hindu-Arabic numerals appears on verso of each leaf, begins with ۲ on original fol.2, oddly foliates pp.444-446 with ۲۱۸ and ۲۱۹ on p.444, ۲۲۰ on p.445 and ۲۲۱ on p.446 ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," rectangular, reads: "يقول الفقير نور الدين ابن بركات الشهير بالباقاني القادري الانصاري شارح هذا الكتاب احمد الله تعالى على اتمامه حمدا كثيرا وقد وقع الابتداء فيه في اوائل سنة تسعين وتسعمائة وتم بحمد الله وعونه وحوله وقوته في ثلاث عشر شهر الحجة من شهور سنة ۹۹٥ خمس وتسعين وتسعمائة وهو اخر ايام التشريق وكان ذلك في حجرة الفقير في المدرسة الكلاسة لصيقة الجامع الاموي ... وقد جمعت فيه من الكتب المذهب من الهداية وشروحها ... وغيرها من كتب عديدة وان تجد عيبا فسد الخللا جل [من لا] عيب فيه وعلا وقال بعض العلماء اللئيم يفضح والكريم يصلح اسأل الله تعالى ان يجعله خالصا لوجهه الكريم وان ينفعني به يوم لا ينفع مال ولا بنون الا من اتى الله بقلب سليم" ; "Scribal," rectangular, continues: "وكان الفراغ من كتابة اصل هذه النسخة المباركة في شهر الله المحرم افتتاح سنة ٩٩۶ على يد اضعف العباد الفقير اليه تعالى هو رضي الدين بن علي البارزي برسم مؤلفها هو مولانا وسيدنا العلامة العمدة الحجة الفاضل الكامل ... الشيخ القدوة البركة نور الدين بن مولانا وسيدنا العلامة العمدة الشيخ ... بركات الشهير نسبه الكريم بالباقاني القادري الانصاري ...امين [؟]"', 'Explicit: "كانها ماتت عن ام وعم فاقسم التركة بينهما للام الثلثان والباقي للعم قال العلامة المصنف هذا اخر ملتقى الابحر ... وقد تم تبيضه بين الصلاتين من يوم الثلاثاء ثالث عشري رجب العظم سنة ۹۲۳ ثلاثة وعشرين وتسعمائة والحمد لله وحده"', 'Incipit: "كتاب البيوع اعلم ان المشروعات اربعة حقوق الله تعالى خالصة وحقوق العباد خالصة وما اجتمعا وغلب حق الله تعالى وما اجتمعا حق العبد ..."', "Title from 'title page' fol.1a (p.5).", 'Ms. codex.', "Neat copy of the second part of Nūr al-Dīn ibn Barakāt al-Bāqānī al-Qādirī al-Anṣārī's commentary on Multaqá al-abḥur, a compendium of Ḥanafī law by Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Ḥalabī."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.2', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From verso of outermost leaf at opening (in this case, incipit page, p.2), "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', "Binding: Lacks cover (outermost leaf carries 'title page') ; numeral ٢ (indicating volume number) inscribed on verso of final leaf ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, eight and four stations ; overall in fair condition despite lacking cover, with much staining, tears and losses to paper, etc.", 'Support: European laid paper with roughly 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-31 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of three crescents (67-68 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.16, etc.) and name "FF. PALAZZUOLI" (for "...AZZUOLI" see p.2, etc. and for "FF. PAL..." see p.110, etc.).', "Decoration: Transfer picture of flower with stems and leaves on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', 'Collation: VII-1 (13), 2 VII(41), V (51), V+1 (62) ; septenions (one anomalous) and quinions (one anomalous) ; final leaf left blank (serves as a ’flyleaf’) ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between pp.77-78).', 'Explicit: "فانه لما سلم على الملك والوزير والاعيان سار لقصر والدته الهيافة فلما رأته تلقته بالاحضان والليل امسا والحديث ليلة غدا وغدا تسمعون يا كرام ما يأتي في بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على سيد ولد عدنان انتهى الجزء الثاني من سيرة اسد الفوارس ويليه الثالث"', 'Incipit: "وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد النبي الامي وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم قال الراوي فقال صاعقة ابن الرهق ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Second of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 596', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.166b, copied by Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad ibn ‘Alī ibn ‘Umar Ibn al-Saqqā for himself. Transcription finished ("wa-najiza taʻlīquh...") Sunday, 27 Rabīʻ II 983 [ca. 5 August 1575].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From spine label and inscription on upper doublure, "IL 40" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboard covered in marbled paper and dark-brown leather at edges, lower cover missing and replaced with heavy brown laid paper (like shipping paper) ; Type II (with flap) though flap now missing (see pattern of wear on fol.1a); upper doublure covered in cream European laid paper with a few lines of poetry scribbled on, as well as former shelfmark ; on the "lower cover" (brown paper) is a rectangular stamp containg a large "R" over the word "BOMBAY," possibly vestigial, as well "Kairo aegypten," "Le Caire Egypte," and "[orie]ntalische Buchhandlung und antiquaria [?]" written in a large, rough cursive hand ; in poor condition.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with laid lines running horizontally and spaced roughly 9 laid lines per cm., chain lines in two groups of three, spaced roughly 12-13 mm. apart with roughly 36 mm. between the groups ; the replaced bifolia of the 5th and 13th quires appear to be on European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Textual dividers in the form of inverted commas, three dots, etc. in red ; text rubricated using orangeish red, lime green, and light purple inks in a purposeful and somewhat systematic manner, occasionally in combination (e.g., a word in purple ink pointed in red dots)- to mark the beginning of each year (purple), to mark death notices or other important events (green), for markers such as "فيها" or "قلت" (red) ; none of these usages is very consistent however, and all three colors can appear serving any of these functions.', "Script: Naskh ; likely Syrian (or Egyptian?) hand ; round with very curvilinear descenders, though not too terribly swooping ; descenders occasionally reach back up to the centerline to connect with the succeeding word; alifs and vertical strokes have a slight leftward slant ; alifs are unserrifed though they have a very slight s-shaped curve to them ; replaced folia supplied in a different hand ; on fol.1a, title in a large red thuluth and beneath it a downward-pointing triangle of text with the author's name and titles in naskh.", 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; occasional poetry with textual dividers lying between and on either side of each bayt ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V-1 (9), 15 V (159), V-3 (166), i ; chiefly quinions ; outermost bifolia of the 5th and 13th quires have been replaced ; 4th quire and most of the final quire are entirely loose ; quire numbering in the form of full words appears in the upper right corner of the recto of the first leaf of each quire after the first ; catchwords present ; foliation for every 10th folio and the final one (fol. 166) in Western numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "وانتهى التاريخ بموته سامحه الله تعالى ونجز تعليقه نهار الاحد السابع والعشرين من ربيع الثاني سنة ثلث وثمانين وتسعماية...علقه لنفسه الفقير المعترف بالعجز والتقصير الواثق بربه القدير حقا محمد بن محمد بن علي بن عمر بن السقا غفر الله له ولوالديه ولمن طالع هذا الكتاب ولمؤلفه ولجميع المسلمين والحمد لله رب العالمين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل. ابتدى به في نهار الاحد وفرغ منه كذلك"', 'Explicit: اموالنا شهاب الدين اني حمدت الله اذبك تم مجدي جميع الناس عندكم نزول وانت جبرتني ونزلت عندي. وفي سابع عشرين ذي الحجة سنة تسع واربعين وسبعماية توفي مؤلف هذا الكتاب عمر بن مظفر بن محمد بن الوردي بمدينة حلب المحروسة ودفن ما لاصقا لاخيه القاضي جمال الدين بمقابر الصالحين خارج باب المقام بحلب [..؟]الله تعالى برحمته ورضوانه', 'Incipit: ثم دخلت سنة احدى وخمس ماية فيها في رجب قتل سيف الدولة صدقة بن المنصور بن دبيس بن فريد الاسدى امير العرب في مقابلته [مقاتلته] السلطان محمد [كذا ; للسلطان محمد] وحمل راسه الى محمد وعمر صدقة تسع وخمسون وامارته احدى وعشرون سنة وقتل من اصحابه فوق ثلاثة الاف وكان متشيعاً وهو الذي بني الحلة بالعراق', "Title from 'titlepage' inscription on fol.1a.", 'Ms. codex.', "Part two of Ibn al-Wardī 's abridgement of the chronicle of Abū al-Fidāʼ with a continuation from 729 to 749 / 1329-49. Text is followed by a death notice for Ibn al-Wardī himself. Description provided by Noah Gardiner."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1050', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.18, transcription apparently completed 9 Ṣafar 787 [ca. 22 March 1385].', "Binding: Heavy boards covered in dark maroon leather ; Type III binding (without flap), tightback ; board linings and flyleaves in wove paper (notes, likely binder's notes, in pencil barely visible beneath board linings) ; upper and lower covers carry blind-tooled rule borders, cornerpieces and central circular ornament (outline only) ; now sewn in rose thread, seemingly over two recessed cords ; overall in good condition.", 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat indistinct) and grouped chain lines (threes and possibly twos) with roughly 9-10 mm. between chains and 42-50 mm. between groups, somewhat cloudy formation, quite sturdy, medium cream to buff in color, burnished ; opening leaf possibly of different paper type ; moisture damage, tears and creases, some repairs / fills.', 'Decoration: Headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of three inverted commas.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Syrian or Egyptian hand in a thin to medium line (line thickness changes) ; mainly serifless with large curvilinear descenders (some sweeping), casually pointed (tāʼ marbūṭah often unpointed) with pointing in distinct or conjoined dots, alif maqṣūrah often pointed as yāʼ, ihmāl sign on sīn, shaqq of kāf often quite horizontal, free-standing alif often terminating in a left-ward foot, final alif often with tail or spur extending below baseline.', 'Layout: Written in 15-16 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, IV+1 (9), i ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تمت منافع الاشربة في تاسع صفر سنة سبع وثمانين وسبعماية"', 'Explicit: "واما من اراد ان يضيف اليه حوايج فليكن رمي [؟] الحوايج عند نضج الشعير ويغلى عليات حتى تخرج قوة الادوية منه ويرفع ويستعمل مع ما يوافقه من الاشربة نافع ان شا الله تعالى"', 'Incipit: "بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم صفة شراب بسفايج ساذج عن طبيب مشهور بسفايج خضر المكسر طري اربع اواقى يرض وينقع في ما حار شديد الحرارة يوما وليلة ويغلي بنار هادية حتى يبقى منه مقدار ما يحل رطل سكر واوقية عسل ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine, early copy of a work on potable medicaments, i.e. beverages or syrups (sharāb) attributed on the 'title page' to Amīn al-Dīn Abū Muḥammad ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʻUmar al-Sīwāsī al-Abhārī (d. 733/1333)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.22', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover, "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', 'Binding: Fiber boards covered in a now dull yellow paper with cream textile over spine and dull olive paper on some board edges ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted paper ; numeral ٢٢ (indicating volume number) inscribed on upper and lower covers ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, four and six stations ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, staining, losses of paper, etc.', "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.2, 46, etc.).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', "Collation: 2 VIII(32), VII (46), VIII+1 (63) ; octonions (one anonmalous) and a septenion ; final leaf left blank (serves as a 'flyleaf') ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: " وزادني بالحب مرتفع الهوى وارماني بالعشق بدرك البيعتي [؟] والليل امسا وصارت الليلة غلسى والحديث ليلة غدا وغدا تسمعون يا اخوان ما جرى في بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على بدر التمام انتهى الجزء الثاني والعشرون من سيرة اسد الفوارس ويليه الثالث والعشرون م"', 'Incipit: "اللهم صل وسلم وبارك على سيدنا محمد النبي الامي وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين قال الراوي نجد ابن هشام ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Twenty-second of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.12', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover, "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', 'Binding: Fiber boards covered in a dull yellow paper with cream textile now over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted wove paper ; numeral ١٢ (indicating volume number) inscribed on upper and lower covers ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, mainly four stations ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, staining, losses of paper, etc.', "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.12, etc.).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', "Collation: 3 VIII(48), VII+1 (63) ; three octonions and an anonmalous septenion ; final leaf left blank (serves as a 'flyleaf') ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly skips two pages between pp.93-94).", 'Explicit: "اقبل هدية من اتاك بفرحه يا من له بالجود باع اطول والليل امسا وصارت الليلة غلسى والحديث ليلة غدا وغدا تسمعون يا اخوان ما يأتي في بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على بدر التمام انتهى الجزء الثاني عشر من سيرة اسد الفوارس ويليه الثالث عشر"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام على سيد المرسلين سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين قال الراوي نجد ابن هشام راوي هذا الكلام ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Twelfth of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.10', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From verso of opening leaf (p.2), "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', "Binding: Lacks cover, though spine carries traces of hinges in recycled paper (ms. 'waste') ; numeral ١٠ (indicating volume number) inscribed on outer leaves ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, mainly four stations ; overall in fair condition despite lacking cover, with staining, some tears, etc.", "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.2, 6, 126, etc.).", "Decoration: Transfer picture of carnation with stems and leaves on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', "Collation: 3 VIII(48), VII+1 (63) ; three octonions and an anonmalous septenion ; final leaf left blank (serves as a 'flyleaf') ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes outerleaves).", 'Explicit: "فكن من بطل اضحى صريعا على الرمال من ضرب يدي والليل امسى وصارت الليلة غلسى والحديث ليلة غدا وغدا تسمعون يا كرام ما يأتي في بقية هذا الكلام واصلي واسلم على سيد ولد عدنان انتهى الجزء العاشر من سير اسد الفوارس ويليه الحادي عشر"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام على سيد المرسلين سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين قال الراوي ثم ان الملك اسد الفوارس ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Tenth of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 653 v.20', 'Origin: This volume lacks dated colophon. As appears in colophon of volume 25 (Isl. Ms. 653 v.25, pp.112-113) transcription of the entire set executed by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt with transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1312 [ca. 14 June 1895]. This volume was likely completed within months of that date. The colophon of vol. 25 also indicates that the work was authored by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ʻArafāt and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī.', 'Accompanying materials: For acquisitions slip and inventory cataloguing slip, see volume 1 of the set, Isl. Ms. v.1.', 'Former shelfmark: From verso of outermost leaf at opening (in this case, incipit page, p.2), "IL 163" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in volume 1, Isl. Ms. 653 v.1).', 'Binding: Lacks cover (outermost leaf carries ’title page’) ; numeral ٢٠ (indicating volume number) inscribed on verso of final leaf ; somewhat crudely sewn in beige yarn or twine, four and six stations ; overall in fair condition despite lacking cover, with much staining, tears and losses to paper, etc.', "Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three crescents (78 mm. long, perpendicular to chains) above 'FERDINANDO BETTI' itself above word in Arabic script (see p.6, etc.).", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, point of final nūn often set deep within bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) varies from strokes or conjoined dots to distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', 'Collation: VIII-1 (15), VIII (31), VII (45), VIII (61) ; octonions (one anonmalous) and a septenion ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes outermost leaves).', 'Explicit: " وقدم الراية بالغاية هذا ما كان انتهى الجزء العشرون من سيرة اسد الفوارس ويليه الجزء الحادي والعشرين باذن خالق الخلق اجمعين وغدا يا اخوان تسمعون بقية هذا الكلام بالكتاب الذي يليه والسلام على من ظللته الغمام"', 'Incipit: "وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد النبي الامي وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين قال الراوي اعلم يا قلاب السروج ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Twentieth of twenty-five volumes containing a collection of the epic tales of al-Malik Asad al-Fawāris ibn Jūdar [Jawdar], the fāris of ʻIrāq, in the manner of the Arabic heroic narrative (sīrah shaʻbīyah) apparently compiled in the present form by Muḥammad ibn Sulayman ʻArafāt (fl.1895) and Amīn ibn Muḥammad al-Sārī (fl.1895).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 380', "Origin: As appears in colophon on pp.990-991, copied by Mahmut, the translator/author's son, for the vizier Hazret Osman Paşa ( حضرت عثمان پاشا) with transcription completed 1 Ṣafar 1112 [ca. 18 July 1700].", 'Accompanying materials: Slip of blue wove paper carrying notes in black ink (between pp.202-203).', 'Former shelfmark: "٢٤٧" in black ink on spine label ; "362 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis] on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in tan / light brown leather framed in black leather (over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures / pastedowns and flyleaves in heavy laid paper with a speckled ebru design (marbled) in red, white, blue, green, purple, and black ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped (with gold-painted, red recessed onlays) scalloped mandorla and pendants, as well as wide, tooled and gold-painted border in a series of s-shaped stamps (forming guilloché roll) flanked by gold rules ; design continues on flap ; sewn in blue thread, broken for many of the gatherings in the first half of the text and sometimes repaired with red thread ; worked chevron endbands in brown and light blue, losses exposing cores of head and tailband ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion, lifting (particularly where cover flanges overlap on spine) and losses of leather, envelope flap detaching from fore edge flap, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of at least three types ; first type with roughly 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines (vertical) roughly 28 mm. apart, well-burnished, thick and creamy (see p.20, etc.) ; second type with roughly 14 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines (vertical) spaced roughly 23 mm. apart, well-burnished, thin and crisp, scrollwork / arms watermark (see p.571, etc.) ; third type with roughly 13 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines (vertical) spaced roughly 14 mm. apart, well-burnished, thin and crisp, watermark with grapes surmounted by a cartouche with "...RBE..." written inside surmounted by a crown (compare to Heawood 2385, see p.791, etc.).', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.4 consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral vegetal accents in green and red on a gold ground, surmounted by a scalloped, semi-circular piece (dome) with floral floral designs in pink, lavender, red, and teal on a gold ground, itself surmounted by delicate vertical stalks (tīgh) in dark blue and flecked with gold above ; entire piece set in a well of white crosses on a thin red band ; text of written area surrounded by frame consisting of a heavy gold band flanked by black fillets and outermost gold rule ; section headings, keywords, notabilia and some vocalization rubricated ; overlining in red ; textual dividers in the form of discs and inverted commas in gold (incipit and facing page, pp.4-5) and red ; edges of text block decorated with floral-vegetal motifs in gold.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Ottoman hand in a medium line ; serifless with effect of words descending to baseline and elongated horizontal strokes, fully vocalized at times.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, IV+1 (9), 48 V (489), III+1 (496), ii ; chiefly quinions ; oblique catchwords on the verso of each leaf ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "قد استراحت قديمة القلم عن السياحت في ميادين الرقم ... على يد افقر من مشى تحت الخضرا... محمود ابن مترجم هذا الكتاب المستطاب ... وجعله هدية لخزانة كتب الوزير المكرم والدستور المفخم ... حضرت عثمن پاشا اناله الله بما يحبه ويشا وكثر من المستعدين من اولاه وجعل اخراه اولى من اوليه ... حرر في غرة صفر المظفر ختم بالخير والظفر من شهور سنه اثنى وعشرة و مائة بعد الالف من هجره من انزل عليه القران حرفا بعد حرف"', 'Explicit: "وضلع امرأه ايله تعبير اولنور زيرا رسول اكرم غرابه فاسق الطلاق ومراه يي ضلعه تشبيه بيورديلر والله اعلم وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وله و صحبه اجمعين"', 'Incipit: "ان احسن الاحاديث بعد الحمد لمن جعل السقف الاخضر مرفوعا ... وبعد بو كمينۀ كم بضاعه وفقير قصير الباعه ..."', "Title from titlepiece on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of the extensive Ottoman Turkish rendering (with commentary) by İshak Hocası Ahmet b. Heyreddin (d.1708) of al-Tirmidhī's (d.892) Kitāb al-Shamāʼil, a collection of traditions comprising the Prophet’s characteristics. Copy apparently executed by the author's son (see colophon) and collated by the author himself (see collation statement on p.1). Descriptive contributions from Nick Krabbenhoeft."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 71', "Origin: As appears in opening on pp.24-25, assembled over the course of nearly three years then set down by the author in 1161 [1748]. A note on 'title page' (p.23) indicates that this ms. is a draft (مسودة) of the work, as attested by the layout and numerous lacunae, likely in the author's hand.", 'Accompanying materials: Two scraps each with notes, etc. (paginated pp.111-112 and pp.569-570).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 152. Bahr al-fatawi."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in yellow laid paper ; upper and lower covers bear blind-stamped central mandorla with rosettes accenting linear pendants and frame in tooled fillets ; sewn in brown thread, two stations ; endbands in red and blue, tail band in fair condition, head band in poor condition with losses and exposed core ; in poor condition with significant abrasion (even gashes), lifting and cracking of leather, lower cover detaching at spine, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 26-28 mm. apart (horizontal) ; crown and grapes watermark ; lightly burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and vocalization rubricated ; overlining and textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; fine Turkish / Eastern Anatolian hand ; characteristically sans serif with effect of slight tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, many sweeping descenders and elongated horizontal strokes, pointing (for two and three dots) mainly in strokes ; opening partially vocalized in red ink.', 'Layout: As may be expected of a draft or rough copy (مسودة), the number of lines per page varies widely throughout.', 'Collation: i, III+1 (7), 6 IV(55), VI (67), 3 V(97), II+1 (102), V+1 (113), V (123), IV (131), V (141), III (147), VI (159), 2 IV(175), VI (187), V (197), VI (209), 2 VIII (241), VI (253), III (259), IV+1 (268), VIII+1 (285), V (295), IV (303), III (309), VI (321), 2 IV (337), IV+1 (346), V (356), II (360), III (366), V+1 (377), 4 IV(409), III (415) ; numerous lacunae (unmarked) as may be expected of draft or rough copy (مسودة), regularly appearing between chapters ; catchwords present ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "فان كانت حية فالثلثان للاختين والسدس للام والسدس الباقي للاخت لام ولا شحاء للاخ لاب الذي هو القائل وان كانت ميتة فالسدس الباقي له"', 'Incipit: "احمد الله الذي جعل المجتهدين المتقدمين هداة المؤمنين ببيان الاحكام ... اما بعد فيقول الفقير الى عفو ربه الغني الشهير بقاضي زاده محمد الارزني مولدا ومحتدا المفتي بمدينة ارزن الروم برتبة قضاء حلب الشهباء لما ضاقت منطقة التحرير عما كتب في كتب الفتاوى وقصرت يد القدرة عن ضبط ما حرر فيها جمعت بقدر الوسع من وقت افتائي فيها بعض واقعات الفتوى وغيره في مجموعة غير مرتبة الى قريب من ثلثين سنة ثم بيضها في سنة احدى وستين ومائة والف من تردد لدي من الفضلاء شكر الله سعيه فصارت مجموعة كبرى وبحرا ذخارا فسميتها ببحر الفتاوى راجيا ان تكون ذخيرة العقبى وعازما على الطافي بها بعد هذا بعض واقعات الفتوى بعناية الله تعالى ..."', 'Title from opening (pp.24-25).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine draft or rough copy (musawwadah) of an extensive collection of legal decisions assembled and set down by Qāḍīʹzādah Muḥammad al-Arzanī, muftī in Erzurum. A detailed table of contents precedes the text (pp.9-16).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 541', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests early 15th century and a dated statement on p.820 provides a rough terminus ante quem of 6th or 8th [?] Muḥarram 848 [ca. 25 or 27 April 1444].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inscription on inner front cover and spine label, "IL 112a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather, with envelope flap in light brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; both upper and lower doublures in dark red leather ; appears to have been cobbled together, with the flap and both the upper and lower covers coming from distinct bindings ; upper cover carries a rectangular geometric design with tooled fillets outlining alternating bands of tooled crosses and a vegetal hour-glass shaped stamp all surrounding a central array of squares (7 x 3) filled with additional tooled cross motifs ; entire panel is accented with gold-tooled dots lower cover carries a vestigial mandorla, visible where the boards were apparently re-covered ; envelope flap carries a partial border of fillets and repeated stamp impressions, two gold-tooled stamps, a single gold fillet, and a gold-tooled shamsah with four nodes and a field of quasi-knotwork stamps ; sewn in white thread, four stations, with some threads broken ; endbands in poor condition with tailband virtually gone and headband significantly damaged ; in poor condition with much abrasion, cracking, lifting and losses of leather (particularly at spine and edges of upper and lower covers), delamination of boards, etc. ; repairs in a few light brown leathers ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (Arab or Persian) laid paper with vertical laidlines, 20 laidlines in 30 mm. and chain lines possibly in alternating sets of 3 and 2 (set of 3, 15-16 mm. apart, with 27 mm. between sets ; set of 2, 18 mm. apart with 32 mm. between sets ; set of 3, 15-18 mm. apart with 33 mm. between sets) ; There are no definitive matches in Humbert, but the relatively short distance between sets suggests a possible resemblance to the 15th cent. Shīrāzī and Iṣfahānī papers in Table VII (see Humbert, pp.46-47) ; paper of the table of contents (p.1-4) supplied on another Oriental laid paper with chain lines difficult to discern ; back flyleaf is in a European laid paper, though with no visible watermarks.', 'Decoration: Section headings and abbreviation symbols (such as mīm used as a fullstop) are rubricated ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh, quite possibly Iraqi ; mainly serifless ; alifs sometimes have an S-shape and usually have a left foot ; bar (shaqq) of the kāf is a separate stroke, such that it terminates to the left of the ascender ; counters are generally tightly closed, such that the waw looks more like a rāʼ ; final yāʼ in word fī is mardūdah ; sparingly pointed.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: I (2), IV-1 (9), 11 IV(97), V (107), III (113), 15 IV(233), IV (240), 21 IV(408), I (410), i ; chiefly quaternions ; quire numbering in Hindu-Arabic numerals occasionally visible, though most likely lost to trimming (see p.339) ; middle-of-quire marks in the form of oblique strokes either in all four corners or in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf and lower outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during digitization, mistakenly repeats pp.476-477, includes back flyleaf).', 'Explicit: "وانما يكون لوالده اخر التعليم والارشاد وقال بعضهم حسناته تكون لابويه فالله اعلم تم كتاب الهبة والصدقة ويتلوه كتاب الاجازة"', 'Incipit: "كذلك [؟] وانما اذ عينتم من ميراث امكم فاذ [؟] جاء بوجه يكون له فيه من قوله ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Kitāb al-Daʻwá -- Kitāb al-Iqrār -- Kitab al-Ṣulḥ -- Kitāb al-Muḍārabah -- Kitāb al-Wadīʻah -- Kitāb al-ʻĀriyah -- Kitāb al-Hibah wa-al-ṣadaqah.', "Fine copy of an acephalous odd volume of a treatise on Ḥanafī law, opening in Kitāb al-Daʻwá and concluding with the final faṣl of Kitāb al-Hibah wa-al-Ṣadaqah. Though Yahuda identifies the work as Ṭāhir ibn Aḥmad al-Bukhārī's Khulāṣat al-fatāwá, the content and arrangement suggest Maḥmūd ibn Aḥmad ibn ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz ibn ʻUmar ibn Māzah al-Bukhārī al-Marghīnānī's summary of his own al-Muḥīṭ al-Burhānī fī al-fiqh al-Nuʻmānī. Preceeded by table of contents. Description provided by Noah Gardiner."])

ar-Arab: (count: ['كتاب الدعوى -- كتاب الاقرار -- كتاب الصلح -- كتاب المضاربة -- كتاب الوديعة -- كتاب العارية -- كتاب الهبة والصدقة.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 466', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; hand, paper, etc. would suggest 14th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 53" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', "Binding: Boards covered in shell 'marbled' paper (mainly in green-blue, brown and red) with red leather over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted wove paper ; resewn in heavy cream thread, two stations (originally four) ; overall in somewhat poor condition with much abrasion, lifting and losses of paper, delamination of lower board, gash in head of textblock, etc.", 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines grouped in threes or irregular threes and twos with 9-14 mm. between chains and 38-45 between groups (vertical, curved, see pp.56, 58, 68) ; quite dense and sturdy though crisp with many inclusions and undissolved fibers, lightly burnished ; staining and tidelines ; front flyleaf in wove paper ; back flyleaf in European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Overlining in red.', "Script: Naskh ; 'Syrian' or Egyptian hand ; serifless with effect of tilt to the right, many closed counters, only casually pointed (pointing for two and three dots in distinct dots), fairly rounded with curvilinear descenders, kāf mashqūqah preferred ; somewhat freely ligatured.", 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of misṭarah evident).', 'Collation: i, 11 IV(88), i ; exclusively quaternions ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Explicit: "ان الساعة ايته [؟] لا ريب فيها اذ يتنازعون بينهم امرهم معنى اذ يختلفون فيما بينهم وقال بعضهم"', 'Incipit: "الوافر قوله تعالى وممن جولكم من الاعراب منافقون معنى الاعراب الذين حوالي المدينة ومن اهل المدينة وهو عبد الله بن ابي واصحابه مردوا على النفاق ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of an extract from the commentary on the Qurʼān by Abū al-Layth al-Samarqandī (d.983?) covering the latter part of Sūrat al-Tawbah (9) from verse 101 through the opening of Sūrat al-Kahf (18) through verse 21. Inscriptions in red and green ink (possibly supplied by Yahuda) on front flyleaf (p.2) lists contents.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 494', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.132a, transcription finished ("wa-kāna al-farāgh min naskhih") in the last 10th of Shaʻbān 688 [September 1289]. Copyist is not named.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 343" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboard covered in black cloth with spine covered in black leather (quarter-bound); Type III binding (without flap); spine gold-stamped with title and author "المنهاد في شرح صحيح مسلم 6" as well as decorative bands along ridges; not original to the codex; in good condition.', "Support: non-European (likely Arab) 'Mamluk' laid paper with horizontal chain lines grouped in twos, multiple groups per page, spaced approximately 1 cm apart; 6 laid lines per cm.", 'Script: Naskh; large, clear Mamlūk hand (possibly Egyptian or Syrian) with straight, vertical, serifless alifs; hamzah and shaddah are used; tanwin is marked.', 'Layout: Written in 9 lines per page; frame-ruled (impression of misṭarah evident).', 'Collation: 1(1), 6 V (61), IV+1 (70), 6 V (130), I (132); quire numbering written out in Arabic (الرابع, الخامس, الخ) at the top-left of the first folio of each quire, first appearing at fol.12a "الرابع", and in many cases more highly visible where the tackiness of the ink led to a transfer of the word onto the facing leaf; middle-of-the-quire marks take the form of small vertical pencil-marks in the bottom-left and top-right corners of most quires; catchwords lacking; foliated in Hindi numerals, with the second folio numbered 19, implying that the codex is acephelous with some 18 or so leaves missing from the beginning of the codex; paginated in pencil, Western numerals, referenced in cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "نجز الجزؤ السادس من المنهاج في شرح صحيح مسلم رحمه الله ورضي عنه [...] الجزؤ السابع ان شا الله تعالى [...] قوله صلى الله عليه وسلم ويل للاعقاب من النار كان الفراغ من نسخه في العشر الاخير من شعبان المبارك سنة ثمان وثمانين وستماية غفر الله لمصنفه ومالكه وكاتبه وقاريه ومستمعه ولجميع المسلمين بمنه وكرمه والحمد لله رب العالمين وصلى الله علي سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم تسليما كثيرا وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل"', 'Explicit: "والمقصود هنا شرح متون الاحاديث وألفاظها دون بسط الادلة وأجوابه الخالفين ومن أخصر ما نذكره أن جميع من وصف وضؤ رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم في مواطن مختلفة وعلى صفات متعددة متفقون على غسل الرجلين"', 'Incipit: "المسؤل فإن فقد احد هذه الشروط فهي حرام بالاتفاق والله اعلم"', 'Title from closing on fol.131b.', 'Ms. codex.', 'An acephelous copy of the sixth part of al-Nawawī’s principal commentary on the Ṣaḥīḥ of Muslim ibn al-Ḥajjāj (d.261/875). Description provided by Noah Gardiner.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 492', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.457, copied by Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad [?] al-Amāsī al-Ḥanafī with transcription of this volume finished 2 Jumādá II 791 [ca. 29 May 1389].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (paginated pp.3-4) -- c. Slip with a note in English and Arabic "Should be beg. of كتاب مناقب الانصار" (paginated pp.23-24).', 'Former shelfmark: From spine label, upper doublure and recto of opening leaf (p.5) "IL 234" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Semi-limp dark brown leather with red leather over spine and edges/turn-ins (leather edged / leather framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap though now lost) ; doublures in tan leather with tooled border ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla with pendants and tooled border ; originally sewn in white thread, two stations, though most threads are now lost ; in extremely poor condition with textblock coming undone and staining, abrasion and losses (mainly flap) to cover which is extremely small and likely was never attached to this textblock ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with 20 laid lines in 25 mm. (vertical) and grouped chain lines (horizontal) of which are visible a set of 4 chain lines (10-13 mm between each), a set of 3 chain lines (8 mm. between each) and a single chain line 11 mm. from the bottom of the leaf (likely part of another group), with 21 mm. between the set of 4 and the set of 3 and 71 mm. between the group of 3 and the single line.', 'Decoration: Section headings, sigla, and signes-de-renvoi (particularly those inscribed by the copyist) rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Mamlūk-era hand, probably Egyptian ; virtually serifless ; alifs generally straight and sans serif, but sometimes with a slight left foot ; somewhat rectilinear descenders ; mainly closed counters ; the lām-alif al-warrāqīyah is used ; on joined alifs (e.g. in نا endings and word-phrases beginning with بال) the base of the alif often drops below the baseline ; largely vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: I (2), V+1 (13), 20 V(213), V+3 (226) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; quire numbering in the form of full words appears beginning at p.53, though partially lost to trimming ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "اخر الجزء السادس من صحيح البخاري رحمه الله من تجزيه عشرة اجزاء * يتلوه في اول الجزء السابع باب قوله ما ننسخ من آية او ننساها ان شاء الله تعالى الحمد لله وحده وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وآله وصحبه وسلم وكان الفراغ من هذا الجزء يوم الجمعة ثاني جمادى الاخرة سنة احدى وتسعين وسبعماية كتابة ومقابلة على يد احمد بن محمد بن محمد[؟] بن عثمان الأماسي الحنفي لطف الله به بمنه وكرمه"', 'Explicit: "فخرج عبد الله فقال اشهد ان لا اله الا الله وان محمدا رسول الله فقالوا شرنا وابن شرنا وانتقصوه قال فهذا الذي كنت اخاف يا رسول الله"', 'Incipit: "باب مناقب عمار وحذيفة حدثنا مالك ابن اسماعيل حدثنا اسرائل عن المغيرة عن ابراهيم علقمة قال فصليت ركعتين ثم قلت اللهم يسر لي جليسا صالحا فأتيت قوما فجلست اليهم فإذا شيخ قد جاء حتى جلس إلى جنبي قلت من هذا قالوا أبو الدرداء فقلت إني دعوت الله أن ييسر لي جليسا صالحا فيسرك لي قال ممن أنت قلت من أهل الكوفة قال أو ليس عندكم ابن أم عبد صاحب النعلين والوساد والمطهرة وفيكم الذي أجاره الله من الشيطان [يعني] على لسان نبيه صلى الله عليه وسلم أو ليس فيكم صاحب سر النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم الذي لا يعلمه أحد غيره ثم قال كيف يقرأ عبد الله والليل إذا يغشى فقرأت عليه والليل إذا يغشى والذكر والأنثى قال والله لقد أقرأنيها رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم من فيه إلى في"', "Title from 'title page' (p.9) and colophon (p.457).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of a sixth volume of al-Bukhārī’s celebrated collection of traditions opening in the 18th bāb of Kitāb faḍā’il al-ṣaḥābah and ending in the 6th bāb of Kitāb tafsīr al-Qur’ān, Sūrat al-Baqarah (Bāb man kāna ʻadūwan li-Jubrīl). Description provided by Noah Gardiner.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 485', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; hand and paper seem to suggest 14th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From foreedge label and inscription on interior of upper cover, "IL 68" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in tan leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in marbled paper (darkblue, pink, and yellow) ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla with vegetal composition (with vertical symmetry, no cloud bands apparent, compare Déroche class. OSv) ; sewn in white thread, two stations, some quires coming loose ; overall in good condition.', 'Support: non-European (Arab) laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and grouped chain lines visible but difficult to discern ; quite thick ; some bifolia splitting.', 'Decoration: Section headings, subheadings, and abbreviations (mainly sigla) rubricated ; textual dividers in the form red discs.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Syrian or Egyptian hand, mainly sans serif (though occasionally appearing on medial alif) with mostly open counters ; text of ḥadīths vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 21-23 lines per page.', 'Collation: IV (8), 7 V(78), V+2 (90), IV (98), VII+1 (113), 2+IV (123), IV (131), 1+V (142), V (152), IV (160), V (170), II (174), 2+V (186), II (190) ; front flyleaf has been pasted to opening leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "فان عبد الله بن عمر حدثه ان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم نزل عند سرحات عند يسار الطريق في مسيل دون هرشي ذلك المسيل لاصق بكراع هرشي [بينه وبين الطريق قريب من] غلوة وكان عبد الله يصلى إلى سرحة هي أقرب [السرحات إلى الطريق] وهي أطولهن وأن عبد الله ابن عمر حدثة أن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم"', 'Incipit: "صلى الله على سيدنا محمد وآله الكتاب الثاني في [تلاوة] القرآن وقراءته وفيه بابان الباب الاول في التلاوة وفيه ثلاثة فصول الفصل الاول في الحث عليها"', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (recto of flyleaf pasted to opening leaf, p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of a second volume of Majd al-Dīn al-Mubārak Ibn al-Athīr's ḥadīth collection opening in al-Kitāb al-thānī fī tilāwat al-Qurʼān ; ends abruptly and appears incomplete. Description provided by Noah Gardiner."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 139', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon. Dated study/reading note on p.151 provides a terminus ante quem of 5 Ramaḍān 1045 [ca. 12 February 1636]. Paper suggests late 15th century, turn of the 16th century and late 16th century.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 68. Alfiyah, Misbah, Miat Amil, & Izhar." ; "٥٩۱" on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla filled with vegetal composition (compare Déroche class. OAi 4) ; flap in different design with gold-painted red leather onlays ; sewn in light pink thread, two stations ; worked endbands, quite soiled but intact ; overall in poor condition with abrasion, lifting of leather, delamination of boards, warping in textblock, etc. ; repairs in various leathers (brown, tan, red, etc.).', "Support: European laid paper of several types ; one type with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), bird [?] on triple mount in circle watermark ; another type with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), anchor in circle with star above [?] (compare Piccard no.119016) ; another type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 31-32 mm. apart (horizontal), bull's head with eyes and mouth, 5-lobed flower on rod above ; still another type with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (vertical), lion passant above a tied bow (ribbon).", 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and abbrevation symbols rubricated ; written area surrounded by red-rule border (including margins) ; simple headpiece (ʻunwān) in red ink on p.268, carries title.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq, naskh-nastaʻlīq and naskh ; several hands ; extensively vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 7 [al-Kāfiyah], 11 [al-Miṣbāḥ], 7 [al-ʻAwāmil] and 11-13 [al-Iẓhār] lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 5 V(50), IV (58), V (68), III (74), 4 V(114), IV (122), III+3 (131), I (133), 1 (134), IX (152), V (162), VI (174) ; catchwords mainly present (absent or cutoff in al-ʻAwāmil) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf and skips two pages between pp.157-158 and pp.121-122).', 'Incipit: "الكلمة لفظ وضع لمعنى مفرد وهي اسم وفعل وحرف ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '8. p.344-p.346 : [originally left blank].', '7. p.268-p.343 : [Iẓhār al-asrār] / Birgevi Mehmet Efendi.', '6. p.261-p.267 : [originally left blank].', '5. p.228-p.260 : [al-ʻAwāmil al-miʼah] / ʻAbd al-Qāhir ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Jurjānī.', '4. p.226-p.227 : [originally left blank].', '3. p.152-p.225 : [al-Miṣbāḥ fī al-naḥw] / Nāṣir ibn ʻAbd al-Sayyid al-Muṭarrizī.', '2. p.150-p.151 : [originally left blank].', '1. p.4-p.149 : [al-Kāfiyah] / Jamāl al-Dīn ʻUthmān ibn ʻUmar Ibn al-Ḥājib.', 'Fine multi-work codex containing several works on grammar, namely the Kāfiyah of Ibn al-Ḥājib, the Miṣbāḥ of al-Muṭarrizī, al-ʻAwāmil al-miʼah [Miʼat ʻāmil] of ʻAbd al-Qādir al-Jurjānī, and Iẓhār al-asrār of Birgevi Mehmet Efendi.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 223', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests first half of 17th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "249 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "91" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.3).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather with spine and foreedge in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in deep red leather with dark brown leather filigree appliqué over blue paper ; pastedowns in salmon-colored paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. NSd 7), pendants and cornerpieces ; sewn in red thread, two stations, with many broken threads and hence loose quires ; worked chevron endbands in red and yellow, headband fully intact and tailband partially gone ; overall in poor condition with fair condition with abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, pest damage, etc.', 'Support: non-European (Persian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (mainly vertical with some curving and sagging) and regularly spaced chain lines faintly visible ; smooth and well-burnised ; some staining.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at the opening of each work (p.4 and p.126) each consisting of rectangular piece with cartouche carrying the basmalah surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome), both pieces filled with swirling vegetal floral design on fields of gold and lapis lazuli and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) ; keywords rubricated ; text of written area surrounded by gold frame.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Turkish or Persianate hand ; partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on ascenders of letters lām, ṭāʼ, and ẓāʼ but not on free-standing alif ; curvilinear descenders ; rightward descenders tapered ; some elongation of horizontal strokes ; pointing in distinct dots ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V-1 (9), 5 V(59), V+1 (70), 5 V(120), i ; chiefly quinions ; many quires loose ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.242-p.244 : [blank].', '3. p.126-p.241 : [al-Shāfiyah] / Ibn al-Ḥājib.', '2. p.124-125 : [blank].', '1. p.4-p.123 : [al-Kāfiyah] / Ibn al-Ḥājib.', "Fine copy of Ibn al-Ḥājib's (d.1249) two concise grammatical treatises, al-Kāfiyah, on naḥw (syntax), and al-Shāfiyah on ṣarf (morphology)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 222', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.91, copied by Muḥammad al-Adirnawī (Mehmet Edirnevî) with transcription completed in in 1050 [1640 or 1].', 'Former shelfmark: "579 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro de Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "138" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.7).', 'Binding: Pasteboards (quite thin, semi-limp) covered in light brown leather with spine, fore edge flap, edges/turn-ins, and onlays in red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in green silver-flecked paper ; upper and lower covers carry mandorla and pendants with gold-tooled and gold-painted accents, as well as a gold-tooled guilloché roll border ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations ; endbands virtually gone ; overall in quite poor condition with both upper and lower covers completely detached at spine (spine leather is completed detached from textblock, though spine lining remains), fore edge flap split and detaching, some abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, moisture damage, etc.', 'Support: non-European (Persian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. and no chain lines apparent ; quite thin (though sturdy) and transluscent .', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.8 consisting of rectangular panel filled with curvilinear vegetal floral design evoking arabesque in gold, red, pink and white on a field of lapis lazuli, surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) filled with same vegetal floral design and itself surmounted by a pendant and vertical stalks (tīgh) ; the entire piece is set into a well/border consisting of gold bands flanking a band of red with white crosses ; text of written area throughout surrounded by a heavy gilt frame with second frame surrounded the text of the margins ; keywords and abbreviation symbols chrysographed occasional textual dividers in the form of red discs ; cloudbands outline in gold accents written area of several pages ; curvilinear vegetal design in gold (reminiscent of that in headpiece) flanks colophon.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; large, elegant hand ; serifless ; characteristic effect of words descending to baseline ; superscripting of final words and letters at the end of a line ; closed counters ; some elongation of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, I+1 (3), 4 V(43), II+1 (48), I (50), i ; chiefly quinions ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes added leaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "حرره الفقير المذنب الادرنوي غفر الله ذنوبه وستر عيوبه لسنة خمسين والف"', 'Explicit: "فيرد ما حذف والمفتوح ما قبلها تقلب الفا تم الكتاب"', 'Incipit: "الكلمة لفظ وضع لمعنى مفرد وهي اسم وفعل وحرف ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Ibn al-Ḥājib's grammatical treatise on naḥw (syntax). Added table of contents precedes work (pp.5-6)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 128', 'Origin: As appears on p.102, transcription finished 1 Ṣafar 1178 [ca. 31 July 1764].', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 21. Al-Kafiyah."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather (interesting grain) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; upper and lower covers bear blind-stamped lozenge with floral vegetal composition (horizontal and vertical symmetry) and border in tooled fillets framing series of x-shaped stamps ; desgin continues on flap with blind-stamped rosette and tooled frame ; sewn in white thread, two stations ; endbands gone, only traces of primaries remain ; in poor condition with significant abrasion, some lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, moisture damage, etc. ; housed in envelope.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10 laid liner per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced roughly 25 mm. apart (horizontal), watermark with grapes and "ROUERGUE" (compare Heawood 3375) ; smooth, thin and fairly translucent ; significant staining and moisture damage to latter quires in particular.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviations rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand ; mainly serifless though occasional right-sloping head serifs appear ; mainly open counters ; occasional sweeping descenders ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 5 V(50), I (52) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب في ١ صفر سنة ١١٧٨"', 'Explicit: "فيرد ما حذف والمفتوح ما قبلها تقلب الفا"', 'Incipit: "الكلمة لفظ وضع لمعنى مفرد وهي اسم وفعل وحرف ..."', 'Title from collation statement on p.102.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of Ibn al-Ḥājib's grammatical treatise on naḥw (syntax)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 625', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on pp.117-118, copied by ʻUmar ibn Muḥammad with transcription finished ("wa-qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min taḥrīr hādhihi al-nuskhah al-sharīfah al-mubārakah...") 10 Rajab 1005 [ca. 27 February 1597].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inserts carrying glosses (paginated pp.13-14, 63-64, 67-68, 119-120).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and label on lower cover, "IL 286" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dull yellow-green laid paper, with red leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted wove paper ; sewn in light pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and cream, fairly condition though with some damage ; overall in fair condition with some staining, abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), and crossbow watermarks, in circle (see p.32, 33, etc.) and alone (see p.118, etc.) ; thin and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.4, consisting of rectangular panel with empty gold cartouche surrounded by vegetal pattern in gold on a field of blue with border in green and black, surmounted by a scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) with same vegetal composition ; entire piece surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in dark red ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by narrow gold-frame with margins ruled in red ; thereafter written area and margins surrounded by red-rule border ; keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; grammatical diagram on p.122.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; an elegant Turkish hand ; serifless with closed counters, elongation of horizontal strokes, tilt to the right and slight effect of words descending to baseline, occasionally more exaggerated.', 'Layout: Written in 9 lines per page ; frame-ruled ; marginalia in various shapes quite artistically arranged.', 'Collation: i, V-1 (9), 4 V(49), IV (57) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," mainly triangular, reads: "وقد وقع الفراغ من تحرير هذه النسخة الشريفة المباركة في اليوم العاشر من شهر رجب المرجب لسنة خمس والف من الهجرة النبوية عليه افضل التحية وكاتب الحروف عمر بن محمد غفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه ولجميع المسلمين والمسلمات والمؤمنين والمؤمنات"', 'Explicit: "فيرد ما حذف والمفتوح ما قبلها تقلب الفا تم الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب"', 'Incipit: "الكلمة لفظ وضع لمعنى مفرد وهي اسم وفعل وحرف ..."', 'Title from inscription on recto of front flyleaf (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of Ibn al-Ḥājib’s grammatical treatise on naḥw (syntax).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 473', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon. Dated ownership statement on 'title page' (p.1) provides terminus ante quem of 1751. Perhaps early to mid 18th century.", 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 31d" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in now dull yellow laid paper with dark red leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; boards exposed rather than lined ; sewn in light brown thread, four stations ; worked endbands in cream, damaged ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of paper and leather, etc. ; repairs in blue textured paper.', 'Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 22 mm. apart (horizontal) with no watermarks visible (most likely lost to trimming) ; thin, crisp and sturdy, cream in color, lightly burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine, medium Turkish or Egyptian hand ; seriffed with gentle right-sloping head-serif on most ascenders (even free-standing alif), slight effect of tilt to the left, many open counters, curvilinear descenders, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes or conjoined dots rather than distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board quite evident in raking light).', 'Collation: 6 V(60), V-4 (66) ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly skips two pages between pp.23-24).', 'Explicit: "ولمن زاغ عن الحق قامعا للحسنات امرا وعن السيئات زاجرا صلى الله عليه وعلى اصحابه وازواجه واتباعه"', 'Incipit: "يقول العبد المعترف بتقصيره الراجي من ربه تهوين عسيره محمد ابن قاسم البقري بلدا الشافعي مذهبا الحمد لله على احسانه واشهد ان لا اله الا الله وحده لا شريك له ... وبعد فقد سألني بعضا من الاخوان اضع له مقدمة مختصرة في تجويد القرآن فاجبته الى سؤاله ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of a treatise on the art of reciting the Qurʼān (tajwīd). Appears incomplete (ends abruptly).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 95', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely late 14th or 15th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Vast number of slips bearing notes, virtually all tipped in (paginated pp.7-8, pp.11-12, etc.).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London. "No. 123. Kanz al-dakaik."', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in laid paper with brown leather over spine, fore-edge and edges/turn-ins (paper faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; worked endbands in red and green (headband) and in red and cream (tailband) ; in poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, moisture damage, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with extremely faint laid and chain lines, very difficult to examine ; numerous repairs ; added leaf with table of contents in European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Abbreviations rubricated throughout ; overlining in red throughout ; keywords, section headings and abbreviations rubricated in excerpts ; written area of final excerpt (p.275-278) surrounded by rule-border in two fillets.', 'Script: Naskh ; Syrian or Turkish hand ; virtually serifless ; large and clear, quite rounded, with open and closed counters, occasional slight effect of tilt to the left and swooping descenders, section headings in bold thuluth ; two additional hands supply the text of the exerpts (from p.272 to p.278) ; the first of these (see p.272-274) similar but more compact, with many closed counters, swooping descenders, etc. ; the final (see p.275-278) more compact, in a heavier line and with fewer swooping descenders ; pointing in main hand and final hand utilizes inverted caret for two dots ; in second hand inverted caret or distinct dots for two dots, and inverted comma for three dots ; marginalia in numerous other hands.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; excerpts of final leaves in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, III+1 (7), 2 III(19), I(21), 6 V(81), VI-1 (92), 2 (94) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes vast number of inserts).', 'Explicit: "ثم اقسم المبلغ على التصحيح ومن صالح من الورثة على شيء فاجعل كان لم يكن واقسم على سهام من بقي ما بقي"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي أعز العلم في الاعصار وأعلى حزبه في الامصار ... قال مولانا ... ابو البركات عبد الله بن احمد بن محمود النسفي ... رايت الهمم المائلة الى المختصرات ... واردت ان الخص الوافي ... فشرعت فيه بعد التماس طائفة من اعنان الافاضل ... وسميته بكنز الدقائق ..."', 'Title from opening (p.6).', 'Ms. codex.', "Extensively annotated copy of the important treatise of Ḥanafī fiqh, a synopsis of the author's own Kitāb al-Wāfī, modelled on the Hidāyah of ʻAlī ibn Abī Bakr al-Marghīnānī (d. 1196 or 7), followed by exerpts."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 968', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; though possibly copied for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974), likely in Egypt in the late 1930s.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 117', 'Binding: Boards covered in black textured cloth ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a geometric pattern (resembling a scale pattern) in dull gold ; cover gold-stamped with "كشف الاسرار" ; sewn in heavy white thread over two recessed cords ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Machine laid and wove papers of a few different types ; opening type (pp.1-4, 17-20) machine laid, lined and with watermark of "GOUVERNEMENT EGYPTIEN" with star and crescent at center and other smaller crescents with three stars (see p.101 to close and compare Walz, "The Paper trade of Egypt and the Sudan," p.91) ; next type (pp.5-8, 13-16) also machine laid and lined but without watermark visible ; next type (pp.9-12, 21-40) a machine wove paper, brown in color, somewhat acidic ; finally (p.41 to close) still another machine wove type, cream in color.', 'Decoration: Some headings and keywords rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; two main modern hands, though possibly supplied by the same copyist ; opening and final works in a careful, compact naskh in a medium to thin line, partially but irregularly seriffed with effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed ; middle work in a larger, bolder naskh, seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs mainly on lām, curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15, 11-14, 11, and 15-21 lines per page ; some sections frame-ruled (see p.42 and following).', 'Collation: i, 3 V(30), 3 II(42), i ; quaternions and binions ; catchwords present ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (distinct for each work) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: [Kashf al-asrār] "وجواهر العلم المخزونة المصونة وانه في ظاهره يحكي عن معنى" ; [Jawāhir al-asrār] "واذا جاء روح القدس المعزي الذي يرسله ربي باسمي فهو يعلمكم كل شيء ويذكركم كل ما قلت لكم" ; [Lawḥ min al-nuqṭah al-ūlá] "وقد اطلعت على مغزاه وزبدته ولا من مبشرة الا بعثت بها اليك انتهت هذه الريحانة التي اقتطفناها من باقة لوح من الواح النقطة الاولى الناظمة في عقدها كل معنى ثمين ومبحث سمين والله مهدي من يشاء الى صراط اليقين وهو حسبنا ونعم الامين ... الضمين"', 'Incipit: [Kashf al-asrār] "بحمد ربنا العلي الاعلى الحمد لله الذي اظهر الشمس بقدرته والاح النور بقوته واطلع الوجه من قمص الامر بحكمته ..." ; [Jawāhir al-asrār] "هو العلي الاعلى يا ايها السالك في سبيل العدل والناظر الى طلعة الفضل قد بلغ كتابك وعرفت سؤالك سمعت لحنات قلبك في سرادق فؤادك ..." ; [Lawḥ min al-nuqṭah al-ūlá ] "لوح من النقطة الاولى الحمد لله الذي اظهر الشمس بقدرته والاح النور بقوته واطلع الوجه من قمص الامر بحكمته ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on 'title page' for opening work (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', '3. p.53-p.84 : Lawḥ min al-Nuqṭah al-ūlá [or Kashf al-asrār ʻammā khafiya ʻan al-afkār] / Baháʼuʼlláh [?].', '2. p.41-p.52 : Jawāhir al-asrār fī maʻārij al-asfār / Baháʼuʼlláh.', '1. p.1-p.40 : Kashf al-asrār ʻammā khafiya ʻan al-afkār / Baháʼuʼlláh [?].', 'Careful copy of a small collection (majmūʻah) of Bahai works namely Jawāhir al-asrār fī maʻārij al-asfār, a concise treatise by Baháʼuʼlláh (Bahāʼ Allāh), Mīrzā Ḥusayn ʻAlī Nūrī (d.1892), flanked by Kashf al-asrār ʻammā khafiya ʻan al-afkār, in incomplete form at the opening of the codex and then apprently repeated at the close under the title Lawḥ min al-Nuqṭah al-ūlá, possibly also of Baháʼuʼlláh.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 467', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.648, transcription of first section (through p.648) completed 24 Rabīʻ II of an unspecified year (lacuna follows سنة). As appears in colophon on p.1063, second section copied by Ismāʻīl ibn Muḥammad al-Zurqānī ( اسماعيل بن محمد الزرقاني ) with transcription completed ("wa-qad faragha min katbih...") 7 Rabīʻ II 976 [ca. 29 September 1568].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover (upper doublure) and fore edge label, "IL 304" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in brown leather ; upper and lower covers carry large blind-stamped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal decoration, reminiscent of Déroche class. NSd 5) and pendants, along with gold-tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in pink thread, two stations, most quires loose ; overall in somewhat poor condition and ill-fitting with much staining, abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, etc. ; repair to fore edge flap in a tooled red leather apparently taken from the spine of another book ; other repairs in tan and red leathers.', 'Support: non-European laid paper of several types ; opening type with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chains either grouped (on the order of 9) or very closely spaced 13-14 mm. apart (V), well-burnished to glossy, brown in color, sturdy and fairly transluscent ; next type with both laid and chain lines quite diffuse, roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), possibly grouped chains lines (in threes) with 11-12 mm. between chains and 39 mm. between groups, much lighter in color, thicker, sturdier and more opaque, burnished to glossy ; from p.350 on still a different paper, lighter in color with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines possibly very closely spaced if not in large group, 14 mm. apart ; final section (from p.650) on another thin, crisp, well-burnished, brownish paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical or horizontal) and chain lines spaced roughly 39 mm. apart ; opening flyleaf in a European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 29 mm. apart (vertical), and anchor in circle watermark with six-pointed star above (66 mm. tall) ; staining and tidelines ; pigment burn to break-through at frame surrounding written area.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.4 consisting of rectangular panel carrying the basmalah in gold muḥaqqaq on a dark blue ground accented with swirling arabesque in green, surrounded by border of gold bands (the innermost with red accents) flanking a series of crosses on white, set off by adjacent palmette (ansa) in the margin ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by gold frame with outermost blue rule ; keywords, sūrah headings (final section) and abbreviation symbols (two-teeth stroke, signes de renvoi, etc.) rubricated.', "Script: Nastaʻlīq and naskh ; three main hands ; opening through p.398 (where hand abruptly changes) in a fine nastaʻlīq, serifless, fairly vertical though with slight effect of tilt to the right and of words descending to baseline, some elongation of horizontal strokes, mainly closed counters, pointing (two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots ; from p.398 to p.522 another fine nastaʻlīq, serifless with dramatic tilt to the right, scarcely pointed, mainly closed counters, sweeping descenders ; from p.522 through p.569 again opening hand, then back to second hand ; final section (from p.650 to close) in an elegant Egyptian or 'Syrian' naskh, serifless and compact with slight effect of tilt to the left, many closed counters, pointing (for two and three dots) in distinct or conjoined dots, rounded with curvlinear descenders.", 'Layout: Written in 32 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV-1 (7), 2 IV(23), III+2 (31), 5 IV(71), IV+1 (80), 2 IV(96), I (98), 12 IV(194), 6 V(254), I (256), 2 IV(272), III+1 (279), 6 (285), II (289), 3 (292), 2 V(312), V+2 (324), 20 V(524), IV-1 (531) ; catchwords mainly cut off, but present in final section ; leaves between sections left partially blank (see pp.198, 648-49) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: [opening section] "وقع الخلاص [؟] من تحريره في اربع وعشرين من الشهر ربيع الاخر من شهور سنة ___ اللهم اغفر لمن دعى لمحرره والناظر فيه والديهما ولمن قال ... برحمتك يا ارحم الراحمين" ; [final section] "Scribal," triangular, reads "وقد فرغ من كتبه اقل خلق الله تعالى واحوجهم الى رحمته العبد الضعيف اسماعيل بن محمد الزرقاني غفر الله له ولوالديه ولجميع المسلمين امين يوم الاربع المبارك سابع شهر ربيع الثاني سنة ست وسبعين وتسعمائة وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم م م"', 'Explicit: "ظلم عليه الامر وندم وتاب فهذا اخر ما قصدت ايراده في هذه السطور مع اعترافي في كل الامور بالقصور وان الكشف عن اوجه تلك المخدرات ابتدائه لمثلي من احدى المنكرات ولكن للمجتهد اجر ... وانا اسأل الله تبارك وتعالى التجاوز عن خطرات الاوهام وعثرات الاقلام ... والحمد لله المنعم اولا واخرا والصلاة والسلام على سيد المرسلين محمد واله واصحابه العز المحجلين وعلى من اتبعهم باحسان الى يوم الدين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي علم القرآن خلق الانسان علمه البيان ارسل رسوله بالهدى ودين الحق ... نريد ان نشرح مشكلات كتاب الكشاف ونحيط حجاب الخفاء عن مباحثة اللطاف ... قوله الحمد لله سيجئ معنى الحمد لله ..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf (p.1).', 'Ms. composite codex.', 'Elegant copy of what appears to be a commentary of uncertain authorship (though possibly by Abū Ḥafṣ ʻUmar ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Qazwīnī al-Fārisī, author of a commentary entitled al-Kashf ʻan mushkilāt al-Kashshāf) upon al-Kashshāf, the renowned commentary on the Qurʼān by Abū al-Qāsim Maḥmūd ibn ʻUmar al-Zamakhsharī (d.1144).'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Andrea Galvani of Pordenone. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 35 and no. 860.', 'Contains astronomical tables: jadwal al-Ḥalabī, jadwal al-Farghānī; colophon mentions work of Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Kathīr al-Farghānī and Nūr al-Dīn ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad al-Naqqāsh.', 'Text and tables rubricated; marginal corrections in hand of copyist.', 'Dates of exemplar and this copy, and names of both copyists in colophon: wa-tammat al-kitābah ʻalá yad aḥwaj al-khalq ilá ʻafw rabbihi al-karīm Muṣṭafá ʻAbd al-Ṣamad ibn al-shaykh ʻAbd al-Jawwād al-Danīṭī[?] ... fī yawm al-thulāthāʾ rābiʻ al-Muḥarram sanat 805 [4 August 1402] ... fī yawm al-jumʻah 25 Abrīl sanat 1919 ʻAbd al-Raḥmān.', 'For other copies of this work, see Mich. Isl. Mss. 736,1, 795,14, and 803,2.', 'Pp. [37-48]. Bound with: Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad ibn al-ʻAṭṭār, Kashf al-qināʻ fī maʻrifat ṣināʻat al-arbāʻ, pp. [1-35].', '"A treatise on different kinds of quadrants in 2 qisms of 10 + 9 faṣls, mentioning those who invented them.... Ibn al-ʻAṭṭār\'s work merits publication and analysis." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 74.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 13', 'Origins: As appears in colophon on fol.23b (p.48), copied by Ḥasan al-Zuhdī al-Arḍirūmī (Hasan Zühdi Erzurûmî, or Erzurumlu). Transcription finished 3 Rabīʻ I [?] 1227 [ca. 3 March 1812].', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 83. Kashf al-sutur."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (blue, orange and white) with spine and turn-ins in red leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in a tinted (blue green) European laid paper with watermark partially visible "GIACOMO..." ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations ; endbands mostly gone ; in poor condition with spine leather cracking and lifting, moisture damage, staining, abrasion, and some ink burn ; currently housed in envelope.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with vertical laid lines spaced 10-11 laid lines per cm. with some sagging and curving ; well-burnished and quite smooth ; no chain lines clearly visible ; flyleaves in European paper with horizontal chain lines spaced 31 mm. apart and vertical laid lines spaced 12 laid lines per cm.', "Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) on fol.1b (p.4) consisting of rectangular panel with central gold cartouche and flanking floral accents in pink, red, yellow, and gold, entire piece framed in borders of pink and gold ; illuminated tailpiece on fol.23b (p.48) consisting of rectangular panel with an arabesque-like pattern in pink, blue, and red on a field of gold above an inverted triangular piece (carrying colophon accented by cloud bands and rosettes) flanked by elaborate floral decoration in pink, blue, white and green ; textual dividers in the form of elaborate illuminated rosettes ; written area framed in a series of gold bands with outermost red fillet ; text rubricated with Qur'anic text, keywords, overlining, etc. in red.", 'Script: Naskh ; Exquisite Ottoman hand ; partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on lām, ṭāʼ, ẓāʼ, etc. but free-standing alif serifless ; slight effect of slant to the left ; open and closed counters ; occasional swooping tails ; partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 2 V(20), II (24), i ; final folio ruled but left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "كتبه حسن الزهدي الارضرومي غفر الله له ولوالديه ولاستاذه امين في ۳ع [؟] سنة ۱۲۲۷ه م"', 'Dedication: As appears on fol.2a-2b (p.5-6) dedicated to the vizier Emin Paşa.', 'Explicit: "والله بكل شيء عليم يعني علمه احاط بكل شيء مجردا كان او ماديا متخلقا باخلاقه او غير متخلق بها والله اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي تجلى بذاته لذاته بالنور ولما سواه من الانبياء والكمل بنور النور ... وبعد فيقول العبد المفتقر الى الله الجليل سعد الله بن اسماعيل لما ترددت [؟] في زمان مديد في مطالعة التفاسير من اراء المتقدمين والمتأخرين في رسائلهم للاطلاع على اية النور بوجه منير فما وجت فيها شيئا ... ولما تم ترقيمها وتحريرها سميتها كشف الستور في تفسير اية النور ..."', 'Title from opening on fol.2a (p.5).', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Saʻd Allāh ibn Ismāʻīl's commentary on Āyat al-nūr."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1000', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 149', 'Binding: Boards covered in black textured cloth ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a geometric pattern (resembling a scale pattern) in a light brown / dull gold color ; cover gold-stamped with "ابن الفارض" ; sewn in cream thread over two recessed cords ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper, dark cream in color.', 'Decoration: Headings rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh with influence of ruqʻah ; modern hand in a medium line ; partially but irregularly seriffed with effect of tilt to the left, slight effect of words descending to baseline, curvilinear descenders, open and closed counters, pointing in strokes or conjoined dots (typically oriented vertically), final yāʼ usually unpointed ; some passages in ruqʻah (see p.33 and p.36).', 'Layout: Written in 15-30 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, IV (8), III (14), II (18), i ; Pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: [Kashf al-wujūh al-ghurr] "والتشبيه والاتحاد والحلول ومحوها كلها تدل على كثرة ما" ; [ʻUqlat al-mustawfiz] "بين الهواء والتراب وجعل الهواء بين الماء والنار صف ٨٧ باب النكاح والتوالد ٩٤ باب نشاة الانسان الاول"', 'Incipit: [Kashf al-wujūh al-ghurr] "الحمد لله الذي فلق بقدرته صبح الوجود عن دليلا وفتق بحكمته رتق الجمع في عين القدم ... اما بعد فمما شاع بين الناس ذكره وذاع امره ان انفع العلوم وارفعها بل صفاوتها ونقاوتها علم التوحيد ..." ; [ʻUqlat al-mustawfiz] "الحمد لله الواجب الذي افتتح وجود السوى بالارواح المهيمة المخلوقة بل المبدعة من فيض السبحات ..."', 'Title from rubricated heading at opening on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', '2. p.32-p.36 : [opening excerpts from ʻUqlat al-mustawfiz] / Ibn ʻArabī.', '1. p.1-p.31 : Kashf al-wujūh al-ghurr li-maʻānī Naẓm al-durr / ʻIzz al-Dīn Maḥmūd ibn ʻAlī al-Kāshānī.', "Careful though incomplete copy of the commentary by ʻIzz al-Dīn al-Kāshānī (d.1334) on Ibn al-Fāriḍ's (d.1235) Naẓm al-sulūk or al-Tāʼīyah al-kubrá, followed by opening excerpts from ʻUqlat al-mustawfiz of Ibn ʻArabī (d.1240)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 53', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.97a (p.203), copied by Aḥmad al-Najīb, muftī in Amasya. Date of transcription not specified. Author, Muḥammad al-Nābulusī al-Maqdisī al-Rifāʻī, provides the date he completed the composition 6 Rajab 1147 [ca. 2 December 1734] in authorial colophon on fol.97a (p.203).', 'Accompanying materials: Several small inserted slips carrying brief comments on text (paginated pp.85-86, pp.89-90, pp.93-94, pp.97-98, and pp.105-106) -- leaf from another ms. slipped in just before final leaf (paginated pp.207-208).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 10. Commentary on al-Hizb al-azam." ; on tail of textblock "٣٠٠".', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in pink-tinted laid paper ; fore-edge flap lined in marbled paper ; upper and lower covers bear central mandorla (gold to green painted paper) with gold-painted accents and border ; sewn in dark blue or black thread, two stations ; chevron endbands in yellow and pink ; in fair condition with minor abrasion and staining ; some negative draw in upper cover and envelope flap.', 'Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 25 mm. apart (horizontal) ; watermark of scrollwork with diamond flanked by flourishes with six-pointed star below (compare Heawood 3728 with six-pointed star in place of cross) ; staining, smudges, creasing, etc.', 'Decoration: Section headings and keywords rubricated ; overlining and textual dividers in red ; red rule-border surrounds written area throughout ; well of headpiece outlined in red rules on incipit page, with basmalah set off in rectangular piece.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Ottoman hand ; effect of tilt to the left ; occasional slight effect of words descending to baseline ; rounded ; many open counters ; the lām alif al-warrāqīyah and kāf mabsūṭah preferred ; point of final nūn assimilated with bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 9 V(90), IV+1 (99) ; chiefly quinions ; final two leaves left blank ; catchwords lacking ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," rectangular, reads: "وكان الفراغ من هذا الكتار المبارك ليلة الاربعاء سادس يوم شهر رجب الفرد من شهور سنة الف ومائة وسبعة واربعين من الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلوة واتم التحية على يد كاتبها ومؤلفها افقر العباد الى الله سبحانه عز شانه جل ثناؤه محمد النابلسي بلدا المقدسي اقليما الرفاعي طريقة ..." ; "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "تمت كتابة شرح الحزب الاعظم على يد حافظ احمد النجيب المفتي باماسية"', 'Explicit: "حمدا دائما بدوام الله باقيا ببقاء الله لا منتهى له دون علم الله والصلوة والسلام على فاتح الفواتح وخاتم الختام ... وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم اللهم واذا اردت بالناس فتنة فاقبضنا اليك غير مفتونين يا ارحم الراحمين"', 'Incipit: "وصلى الله وسلم على الحبيب الكريم الحمد لله المذكور بكل لسان الهادي لهذه الامة المحمدية بمن تنورت من نور الاكوان ... وبعد فان الاشتغال بالذكر من فضل الطاعات واولى ما انفقت فيه نفائس الاوقات ... وقد كثرت الاحاديث الصحيح على ملازمته في المساء والصباح وافضله ما وردت فيه الاخبار ونقلته وحزبته الائمة اولوا الفضل والفلاح فمن ذلك حزب الامام ... الحزب الاعظم المضاف للنبي الاكرم لمنلا علي القاري افاض الله على قبره سحائب الرضوان ... فقد حوى من الادعية النبوية ما لا يحتوي غيره وقد احضره من انتمى الي لاخذ العلم واخبرني ان ليس له شرح فيما علم الشيخ ... خليل بن مصطفى من دياربكر ... فلما سألني ذلك رأيت اني لست اهلا لذلك ثم استخرت الله تعالى لمحبتي لهذه الادعية النفيسة فرأيت ان هذا شرح يتم ... ولما اكملته سميته الكاشفة لادعية النبي الاكرم في شرح الحزب الاعظم والدعاء الافخم ..."', 'Title from opening on fol.2a (p.3).', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Muḥammad al-Nābulusī al-Maqdisī al-Rifāʻī's commentary on al-Ḥizb al-aʻẓam, prayers compiled by al-Qārī al-Harawī."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 248', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.69, copied by Ḥamzah ibn ʻAbd al-Wahhāb in 828 [1424 or 1425], likely in Egypt. As appears in patronage statements/ex libris on p.6 and in titlepiece on p.13, copied for Karīm al-Dīn, perhaps al-Wazīr al-Ṣāḥib Karīm al-Dīn ʻAbd al-Karīm ibn Kātib al-Manākh (d.852/1448) (see Ibn Taghrībirdī, Ḥawādith al-duhūr, sanat ithnatayn wa-khamsīn wa-thamānimiʼah, shahr Rabīʻ al-Ākhir).', 'Former shelfmark: "۱۱۹" on paper label on upper cover (repeated in pencil on titlepage for al-Asmāʼ al-ḥusná, p.7).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather with spine and edges/turn-ins in dark brown leather of similar color ; Type III binding (without flap) ; flyleaves and pastedowns in yellow-tinted European laid paper ; upper and lower covers bear stamped and gold-painted scalloped mandorla with vegetal composition (compare Déroche class. NSd 7) ; sewn in red thread, four stations ; overall in fair condition with staining, abrasion, some lifting of leather at edges, etc.', "Support: non-European laid paper (likely Egyptian) with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines grouped in threes (vertical) with 9-11 mm. between the chains and 37-42 mm. between the groups ; alternating tinting of the bifolia ; flyleaves in a yellow tinted European laid paper with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal) and moon in shield with face in profile and 'B G' watermark as well as in an untinted European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (vertical), and watermarks of spread eagle and coat of arms with lion rampant in shield with crown above ; numerous repairs.", 'Decoration: Rectangular panel at opening (p.6) carries poetic patronage statement (خدمت بها من قد سما بفعاله واقواله ما بين قارئ وكاتب كريم يعادي الباخلين وانه بمصر عزيز صاحب وابن صاحب) accented by cloud bands and swirling arabesque ; on p.7, illuminated titlepiece for al-Asmāʼ al-ḥusná in the form of a rectangular panel with accompanying ansa (in this case, roundel) carries title in white (الاسما الحسنى نفع الله بها) with gold outline set among gold vegetal design on a field of blue ; entire piece is framed by a heavy gold band and blue rule ; on p.12, at close of al-Asmāʼ al-ḥusná a fine illuminated tailpiece in gold and blue in the form of an almond-shaped panel flanked by illuminated rosettes carries inscription in white (تمت الاسما) ; on p.13, exquisite illuminated titlepiece for al-Burdah consisting of a large rectangular panel divided to smaller rectangular panels carrying the title and ex libris (الكواكب الدرية في مدح خير البرية صلى الله عليه وسلم برسم خزانة المقر الاشرف العالي المخدومي الصاحبي الكريمي كريم الدين عظم الله شأنه) in white set in lozenge-shaped cartouches with flanking roundels filled with vegetal design in gold on fields of blue ; ansa in the form of a roundel accompanies uppermost panel ; textual dividers in the form of illuminated rosettes with blue and red accents appear throughout ; keywords occasionally chrysographed ; for each of bayt of al-Burdah, saṭr in black and ʻajuz rubricated ; written area of incipit and facing page of al-Burdah surrounded by frame consisting of gold band and heavy blue rule ; tailpiece in the form of a rectangular panel carrying the colophon follows al-Burdah on p.69 and closely resembles opening rectangular panel (p.6).', "Script: Text of al-Asmāʼ al-ḥusná in fine Mamlūk naskh, tailpiece in script resembling 'Eastern Kufic' ('broken cursive' or New Abbasid Style, NS) ; titlepiece for al-Burdah in thuluth, saṭr of each bayt in muḥaqqaq, ʻajuz in fine Mamlūk naskh ; fully vocalized ; glosses (takhmīs, mainly in Turkish, ending abruptly at p.28) in naskh-nastʻalīq, varying hands.", 'Layout: Written in 6 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, II (4), III (10), VII (24), III+3 (33), ii ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals begins with incipit page (p.14) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "تمت البردة الشريفة بحمد الله تعالى وعونه على يد الفقير الى الله تعالى حمزة بن عبد الوهاب غفر الله له ولوالديه وللمسلمين اجمعين وذلك في عام ۸۲۸".', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of Qaṣīdat al-Burdah by al-Būṣīrī (d.1294–7?) with later takhmīs mainly in Ottoman Turkish. Preceded by al-Asmāʼ al-ḥusná (with numerical values for each name) and following by notes and excerpts.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 228', 'Origin: As appears in colophon, executed by Muḥammad ibn ʻAlī [ibn Aḥmad] al-Ziftāwī in the first tenth of Muḥarram 783 [March-April 1381].', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in a light brown leather ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in heavy untinted wove paper ; upper and lower covers carry decoration evoking the Islamic style with central oval ornament (wreath stamped in green) and cornerpieces (scrolling vegetal motifs stamped in green) as well as stamped border of repeating floral / shell pattern in red ; sewn in white thread over three heavy white cords (flexible sewing) ; no endbands ; paper label on spine ; in fairly good condition though sewing exposed between a few separated gatherings.', 'Support: non-European (Arab) laid paper with chain lines grouped in threes running horizontally, spaced roughly 12-15 mm. apart with roughly 42 mm. between the groups ; laid lines running vertically spaced roughly 9 laid lines per cm. ; heavy and well-burnished with undissolved fibers and inclusions visible ; staining ; numerous reinforcements and repairs throughout, mainly guards but also fills (see first folio carrying the titlepiece and opening).', 'Decoration: Exquisite, richly illuminated titlepiece ; ansa in the form of roundel with rosette attached to upper panel, which is surmounted by fine arabesque and vertical stalks in blue, lavender, gold, green, etc. ; upper panel contains cartouche carrying title in foliated Kufic lettered in gold on a field of blue with green swirling vegetal pattern ; lower panel contains large scalloped medallion (shamsah) carrying statement of authorship and ex libris lettered in gold with lined cloud-bands and vegetal accents, surrounded by a field of blue with floral vegetal design in gold, lavender, and green ; decorative strapwork border in gold surrounds entire piece ; illuminated headpiece consisting of a rectangular panel with roundel/rosette ansa ; within the panel, the basmalah is executed in gold accented with cloud-bands and cross-hatch pattern ; illuminated tailpiece consists of a rectangular panel with roundel/rosette ansa ; within the panel two roundels with rosettes flank the date of transcription accented with cloud-bands and cross-hatch pattern ; a red rule-border outlines the text itself, with illuminated rosettes flanking the lines of the amplification (takhmīs) ; on the opening and facing page, rosettes in blue and gold along with roundel in gold bearing word "تخميس" [?] ; text partially chrysographed with final words of each line in gold.', 'Script: Very fine Mamlūk calligraphy ; saṭr and first words of ʻajuz for each bayt in thuluth (verging on tawqīʻ), final words of ʻajuz in tawqīʻ and amplification in serifless naskh ; text and takhmīs fully vocalized ; title of titlepiece in foliated Kufic ; ex libris of titlepiece in tawqīʻ ; text of tailpiece in riqāʻ verging on tawqīʻ.', 'Layout: Written in 12 lines per page, 3 lines of the poem and 9 of the amplification, with the saṭr and first few words of the ʻajuz of each bayt filling the column width horizontally and the remainder of the ʻajuz appended slanting down diagonally, and three lines of amplification centered below the saṭr and first few words of the ʻajuz ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, III (6), II (4), 4 I(18), I+1 (21), 2 I(25), I+1 (28), i ; difficult to discern original gatherings, but appears to consist mainly in single bifolia (singulions) ; no catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads: "تمت مع التخميس بحمد الله وعونه وصلى الله على نبيه محمد كتبها محمد بن علي الشهير بالزفتاوي عفا الله عنه بكرمه في العشر الاول من شهر الله المحرم افتتاح عام ثلاث وثمانين وسبعمائة حسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل"', 'Explicit: "ما رنحت عذبات البان ريح صبا واطرب العيس حادي العيس بالنغم"', 'Incipit: "بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الحمد لله رب العالمين ما بال قلبك لا ينفك ذا ألم ... امن تذكر جيران بذي سلم مزجت دمعا جرى من مقلة بدم ..."', 'Title from titlepiece.', 'Ms. codex.', "An elegant copy of al-Būṣīrī's poem in praise of the Prophet with its amplification (takhmīs) by Nāṣir al-Dīn Muḥammad al-Fayyūmī (mid-14th century), as well as a fine specimen of Mamlūk calligraphy as executed by al-Ziftāwī (d.806/1403 or 4)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 446', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; perhaps late 15th or early 16th century as suggested by paper and hand.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures and interior of flap in dark green leather ; hinges in blue paper cut with scalloped design ; upper and lower covers bear large stamped and gold-painted scalloped mandorla with pendants (compare Déroche class. OAi 10) as well as gilt roll border consisting of a series of s-shaped stamps ; design continues on envelope flap ; upper and lower doublures carry tooled and gold-painted outline of scalloped mandorla and gold-painted rule border ; sewn in black thread, four stations ; endbands lacking ; in fair condition with much abrasion, staining, and lefiting of leather at edges and on spine ; some delamination of boards.', 'Support: mainly Arab laid paper of perhaps two types, each with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly indistinct with some curving) and chain lines (vertical) grouped in threes, in one type spaced roughly 12-14 mm. apart with 30 mm. between groups (see p.4, etc.) and in another type spaced roughly 12 mm. apart with 38-40 mm. between the groups (see p.36, etc.), inclusions visible, sturdy, medium cream in color, burnished ; leaf carrying pp.23-24 delaminating at upper outer corner ; back flyleaf in heavy laid European paper with chain lines oriented horizontally spaced roughly 30 mm. and laid lines oriented vertically, quite distinct and spaced roughly 8-9 laid lines per mm. ; front flyleaf in smooth, thin European laid paper with chain lines oriented horizontally spaced roughly 25 mm. apart, laid lines very fine and faint, difficult to measure, watermark partially visible (lion rampant in shield).', 'Decoration: Textual dividers in the form of gold rosettes appear in preface and throughout the text of the poem and its translation, often appearing between the saṭr and ʻajuz for each bayt ; written area of preface (pp.2-3) bordered in frame consisting of gold band outlined by black fillets ; partially rubricated with final words of the ʻajuz for each bayt occasionally in red.', 'Script: Very fine calligraphy ; saṭr and first words of ʻajuz for each bayt in thuluth, final words of ʻajuz in tawqīʻ ; text of preface and elucidation in fine Ottoman naskh with right-sloping head serifs on lām of definite article and other ascenders apart from free-standing alif, gentle slant to the left ; preface, text of poem and elucidation fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 10-14 lines per page, 5 lines of the poem and 5-9 of the amplification, with the saṭr and first few words of the ʻajuz of each bayt filling the column width horizontally and the remainder of the ʻajuz appended diagonally, the elucidation in Turkish appearing on the following line or occasionally the following two lines centered below the saṭr and first few words of the ʻajuz ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board cearly evident).', 'Collation: i, III(6), VI(18), i ; catchwords present, but only partially visible or completely cut off ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "ما رنحت عذبات البان ريح صبا واطرب ...العيس حادي العيس بالنغم وصلى الله على خير خلقه محمد واله الطيبين الطاهرين وسلم تسليما"', 'Incipit: "قال الشيخ الامام العالم حجة الادب لسان العرب قدوة الانام بقية السلف الكرام شرف الدين ابو عبد الله محمد بن سعيد البوصيري رحمه الله سبب انشاء هذه القصيدة المباركة اني كنت قد اصابني خلط فالج ابطل نصفي ... وبه ثقتي وعليه التكلان من الخدلان امن تذكر جيران بذي سلم مزجت دمعا جرى من مقلة بدم اكد كمى ذى سلمدگى اهل وجيرتى كم قان ياش اغلمق كوزكك اولدى عادتت [؟]"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of al-Būṣīrī's poem in praise of the Prophet accompanied by elucidation in Turkish ; opens with preface (see pp.2-3)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 213', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.60a (p.119), copied by ʻAbd al-Wahhāb al-Ḥusaynī. Transcription of this copy finished "qad najiza taḥrīr nuskhat hādhā al-tiryāq al-Fārūqī..." 1st of Ramaḍān 1270 [ca. 28 May 1854] in Baghdad.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in painted lacquerwork (black, red, and bronze) with spine in red leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in red lacquerwork with gold-painted accents ; upper and lower covers carry traditional bookcover motifs of central panel (elongated, lobed), pendants and cartouches serving as corner pieces ; all carry inscriptions of gold / bronze lettering in naskh and nastaʻlīq on luminescent fields of red, mainly verses from the dīwān (e.g. verses in pendants [upper cover] أنا لم لا أعد من زمرة الاب رار في نعت آل بيت النبي [lower cover] ونعوتي تسجلت بكتاب هو في عليين عند علي) ; painted vegetal border in bronze ; doublures bear gold-painted scalloped mandorla with pendants flecked with "bronze," also gold painted border ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and blue (or green? quite soiled) ; in poor condition with the lacquer cracking and crazing or simply lost ; several of the panels beneath the outermost lacquer layer are missing, from the upper cover in particular.', 'Support: Machine wove paper, quite sturdy.', 'Decoration: Illuminated titlepiece on fol.1a (p.1) consisting of a single rectangular panel divided to smaller horizontal rectangular panels containing scalloped cartouches (mainly outlined in gold, flanked by floral accents in gold on fields of blue, others filled with gold) bearing title "الترياق الفاروقي من منشآت الفاروقي" and lines of prayer for the Prophet and his family and his companions ; illuminated headpiece on fol.1b (p.2) consists of a rectangular piece with gold-filled cartouche carrying title in white "الباقيات الصالحات" flanked by pieces reminiscent of dome design above ; rectangular piece is surmounted by a well with scalloped domes forming w-shaped piece bearing floral vegetal design in pink, green, white, orange, blue, etc. on fields of gold, blue and red ; text surrounded by simple frame consisting of a wide gold band and black fillets and at some distance a second rule-border consisting of a narrow gold band flanked by black fillets ; a few textual dividers in the form of black and red discs ; almond-shaped designs marking poems which have been commented upon and indicating by whom ; rosettes and floral designs appear on incipit page ; some lining in blue ink ; text rubricated with portions of verses, section headings, keywords, textual dividers, overlining, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Persianate hand ; mainly sans serif apart from left-sloping head serif on alif of lam alif ligature, adhering closely to baseline, pointing in distinct dots, final yāʼ often unpointed ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; single column frequently divided to two columns to set-off poetry ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 6 V(60) ; entirely quinions ; catchwords present, though usually set far down in the lower margin and occasionally absent ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "قد نجز تحرير نسخة هذا الترياق الفاروقي لناظم نفايسه في سلك انفاسه وجامع اجزائه في محفظة ولائه حسان زمانه وسحبان اوانه حضرة المولى عبد الباقي افندي الفاروقي بقلم الداعي لذلك الجناب تراب اعتاب باب اهل بيت ابي تراب الراجي عفو ربه التواب السيد عبد الوهاب الحسيني وذلك بمدينة السلام بغداد في غرة رمضان سنة ١٢٧٠"', 'Explicit: "في كل بيت اجمة بها ثوى معنى اذ الفكر انتحاه همهما وهذه خاتمة بها كتاب الباقيات الصالحات اختتما جعلتها وسيلة رقى بها يوم الحساب من ولائي سلما لذاك قلت رافعا عقيرتي بالشكر املا الملا ترنما على ذو [كذا] الطول العميم ارخوا بالباقيات الصالحات انعما سنة ١٢٧٠ ... وقال تمت فارخ ختامها المسك كانا ١٢٧٠ "', 'Incipit: "صنو طه المصطفى وابنته مع سبطيه الكنوز المقفله نقط رصعت الباء مع النون والياء التي في البسملة سور القران فيها سورت سيما تسويرها للحمد له وهذه المقدمة المحتوية على النتيجه من المبانى النضرة البهيجه والمعانى العطرة الاريجه جعلها براعة لاستهلال كتابه الموسوم بالباقيات الصالحات في نعت اهل بيت سيد السادات عليه وعليهم اسنى الصلوات وازكى التسليمات ..."', 'Title from titlepiece on fol.1a (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', '3. fol.60b : [colophon].', '2. fol.51b-fol.60a : [eleven taqārīẓ in praise of the work].', '1. fol.1a-fol.51a : al-Bāqiyāt al-ṣāliḥāt / ʻAbd al-Bāqī al-Fārūqī.', "Early copy of the author's short dīwān, mainly religious poems for the family of the Prophet, etc., followed by eleven favorable blurbs (taqrīẓ / taqārīẓ) for the work."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 448', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; decoration, hand, paper, etc. would suggest 16th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Slip of wove paper with notes in pencil "448 (Kasidat) al-Burdah Poem by al-Busiri 16th cent."', 'Former shelfmark: "239 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf ; "122" inscribed in pencil on \'title page.\'', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings and narrow hinges in pale orange laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry central rectangular panel filled with gold-tooled and painted semé pattern as well as further accents in gold-tooled rosettes and border consisting of a series of s-shaped stamps with flanking gold-painted fillets ; now sewn in pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, fairly good condition ; overall in good condition minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persianate) laid paper with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat distinct) and occasional single chain line visible, thick and sturdy, well-burnished, dark cream in color ; flyleaves and added leaves in European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of bird with "G B" below ; much staining and tidelines.', 'Decoration: Exquisite (though damaged) frontispiece consisting of a double-page illumination carries the opening verses and elucidation in Persian set-off by cloud-bands, with adjacent scalloped triangular piece (or hasp), elaborate borders (outermost accented with perpendicular stalks [tīgh]), and upper and lower panels all carrying swirling vegetal design in shades of red, blue, lavender, green, white, and gold on fields of black, gold, and lapis lazuli ; written area throughout surrounded by frame in gold and green bands with outermost blue rule ; text of the Burdah mainly chrysographed, with some lines in blue ; textual dividers in the form of illuminated rosettes set off each hemistich ; illuminated floral decoration flanks elucidation in Persian.', 'Script: Naskh and nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Persianate and Turkish hands ; text of Burdah in a fine Persianate naskh, serifless, with curvilinear descenders and pointing in distinct dots, vocalized ; text of Persian elucidation in a fine nastaʻlīq with characteristic descent of words to baseline and elongation of horizontal strokes ; marginal Turkish elucidation in an elegant nastaʻlīq (talik).', 'Layout: Written in 12 lines per page with 6 additional lines of the Turkish elucidation on the diagonal in the outer margin ; three verses of the poem in 6 lines (filling the column width) with each saṭr and ʻajuz to a line) and elucidation in 6 lines (four on the diagonal, two horizontal but centered).', 'Collation: ii, IV-1+1 (8), 2 IV(24), II+2 (30), ii ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present.', 'Explicit: " ... واطرب العيس حادي العين بالنغم ... تا برانند اشترانرا بنده گان پر نغم ... اشترمتسه طرب ويردكجه تأثير نغم تم الترجمة بالخير م م"', 'Incipit: "امن تذكر جيران بذي سلم مزجت دمعا جرى من مقلة بدم ای زیاد صحبت یارانت اندر ذی سلم اشک چشم امیختی با خون روان گرده بهم ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of al-Būṣīrī's poem in praise of the Prophet accompanied by elucidation in Persian and Turkish."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 230', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.38, executed by es-Seyyid Abdullah, known as el-İmam, pupil of Hafız Osman Efendi, with transcription finished in 1109 [1697 or 8].', 'Former shelfmark: "332 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.1) ; "118" also inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in olive-tan leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in purple coated and embossed paper with central gold-painted floral accents and border ; upper and lower covers carry stamped, gold-painted scalloped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition over red onlays) and pendants as well as gold guilloché roll border ; design continues on flap ; sewn in yellow thread, four stations ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of leather (at foreedge especially), staining, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical or horizontal, contrasting direction for written area and surrounding frame into which it has been set / mounted) and occasional chain lines visible, cloudy formation, crisp and transluscent, well-sized and burnished to glossy ; final leaf in wove paper.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) appears at opening on p.2 consisting of a rectangular panel with empty gold cartouche and flanking floral pieces in pink, white, red and orange on fields of gold and blue, surrounded by heavy frame or well in bands of gold and black interlace, white crosses on a red ground, and white crosses on a blue ground, and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area surrounded by frame in heavy gold band outlined by black fillets with a narrow gold band outlining the panels formed by the layout of alternating line filling the column width and three centered lines.', 'Script: Exquisite specimen of Ottoman calligraphy ; opening and every fourth line (saṭr or ʻajuz of a particular bayt) in a fine thuluth ; following three lines (ʻajuz or saṭr of continued or following bayt) in naskh ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 9 lines per page with the opening line (the basmalah) and every fourth line thereafter (saṭr or ʻajuz of a particular bayt) filling the column width and the three following lines (ʻajuz or saṭr of continuing or following bayt) centered below.', 'Collation: i, IV+I (10), IV+2 (20), i ; two anomalous quaternions ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, appearing in the lower-inner left corner of the written area beginning with the incipit page ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads: "كتبه الفقير السيد عبد الله المعروف بالامام من تلاميذ عثمان افندي غفر الله ذنوبهما آمين سنة ۱۱۰۹"', 'Explicit: "ما رنحت عذبات البان ريح صبا واطرب العيس حادي العيس بالنغم اللهم صل وسلم على اشرف الخلق واكمل الخلق محمد واله والطاهرين اجمعين وسلم تسليما كثيرا كثيرا الى يوم الحشر والقرار ما دام الدهور والايام"', 'Incipit: "بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم آمن تذكر جيران بذي سلم مزجت دمعا جرى من مقلة بدم ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Exquisite copy of al-Būṣīrī's poem in praise of the Prophet executed by the renowned Ottoman calligrapher, Seyyid Abdullah of Yedikule (Yedikuleli Seyyid Abdullah Efendi, d.1731), favorite pupil of the celebrated calligrapher Hafız Osman Efendi (d.1698)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 257', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol. 168b-169a, transcribed ("amaranī...bi-taḥrīr hādhihi al-raqāʼiq...") for Ali Rıza Paşa (Ottoman ruler in Baghdad from 1831-1842) by Sufyān al-Wahbī al-Baghdādī in 1257 [1841 or 2], likely in Baghdad.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; gold-stamped central mandorla, pendants and corner pieces with vegetal decoration ; gold frame ; good condition.', 'Support: Glossy laid European paper, AB watermark ; flyleaves of two European papers, one having coat of arms with hand and balance watermark and the other coat of arms with eagle and horse watermark.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpieces in Ottoman style evoking the miḥrāb with vegetal, floral decoration painted in gold, blue, red, green, orange, white, pink, etc. mark each section (fol. 1b, fol. 11b, fol. 32b) ; cartouche with gold field left blank accompanies each ; gold rule borders surround text ; occasional rubrication to highlight sections or introduce quotes.', 'Script: Naskh ; same fine Ottoman / Iraqi hand throughout ; vocalized throughout.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page.', 'Collation: 13 V (130), IV (138), 3 V (168), I (170) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination added later in pencil.', 'Dedication: "قد امرني من يجب علي امتثال امره لاداء بعض حمده وشكره حضرة تاج الوزراء ومن استقامت بعدالة خطة البلدة الزوراء الوزير الخطير والدستور المثير افندينا علي رضا باشا جعل الله له الرضا غطاء وفراشا بتحرير هذه الرقائق بعد ان جمعها فاوعى [?] وتنميق هذه الدقاق بعد ان القى اليها سمعا كيف لا وهي مقتسبة من اثار انوار قطب العارفين والقنديل النوراني سيدي الشيخ عبد القادر الكيلاني قدس الله سره"', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت قد امرني من يجب علي امتثال امره لاداء بعض حمده وشكره حضرة تاج الوزراء ومن استقامت بعدالة خطة البلدة الزوراء الوزير الخطير والدستور المثير افندينا علي رضا باشا جعل الله له الرضا غطاء وفراشا بتحرير هذه الرقائق بعد ان جمعها فاوعى [?] وتنميق هذه الدقاق بعد ان القى اليها سمعا كيف لا وهي مقتسبة من اثار انوار قطب العارفين والقنديل النوراني سيدي الشيخ عبد القادر الكيلاني قدس الله سره وانا الفقير الى الله سفيان الوهبي البغدادي عفى عنه وذلك في سنة الف ومايتين وسبع وخمسين النبوية بعد الهجرة"', 'Explicit: "ويصير من الاغيار اجنبيا ومن افات نفسه بريا ويصفو قلبه من كدر بشريته ويفارق بصره ملاحظة الخلق تمت..."', 'Incipit: "الحمدلله كاشف الغمة والصلوة والسلام على نبيه خير البرية وشفيع الامة فان الله جعل قلوب العارفين معادن اسراره وزينها بطوالع نواره وصفاهم من كدورات البشرية واشهدهم مجاري احكام الربوبية فقال الغوث الاعظم المستوحش عن غير الله..."', 'Title from fol. 11b.', 'Ms. codex.', '3. fol. 32b-169a : "قال العلامة مؤلف البهجة رحمه الله تعالى فانه من رام ان يدرك هذا الشا [?]..."', '2. fol. 11b-32a : "الحمدلله رب العالمين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين فهذه خمسة عشر مكتوبا للاستاذ القطب الرباني والغوث الصمداني الشيخ عبد القادر الجيلاني..."', '1. fol. 1a-11a : "الحمدلله كاشف الغمة والصلوة والسلام على نبيه خير البرية وشفيع الامة فان الله جعل قلوب العارفين معادن اسراره..."', "A collection of Ṣūfī writings pertaining to ʻAbd al-Qādir al-Jīlānī (d. 561/1166), Ḥanbalite theologian, preacher and Ṣūfī, who gave his name to the order of the Qādirīyah. Included are some fifteen tracts attributed to al-Jīlānī, reportedly translated from the Persian by ʻAlī ibn Ḥusām al-Dīn ibn ʻAbd al-Malik al-Junbūrī al-Hindī al-shahīr bi-al-Muttaqī, as well as excerpts from al-Shaṭṭanawfī's collected accounts."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 606', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.192b, copied in Badahl (Egypt) by Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd al-Dāʼim ibn Muḥammad ibn Sulaymān al-Badahlī al-Shāfiʻī. Transcription completed ("kān al-farāgh min naskhih...") during Jumādá I 990 [May-June 1582].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 108" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboard covered in paper printed with a red, black and white vegetal pattern; Type III binding (without flap); not original to codex; worn but intact.', "Support: non-European laid paper; at least three different papers are used; the paper of the 14th and 15th quires is notable for being quite thin; at least one of these papers can be described as 'Mamluk,' having 3 sets of 2 horizontal chain lines, with the chain lines roughly 12 mm. and groups roughly 40 mm. apart; roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (see fol. 37 where the paper's features are readily apparent).", "Decoration: On fol.3b, circular world map painted chiefly in blue and brown with a border of green lobes (representing the belt of mountains surrounding the Earth) and richly labeled with Mecca at the center, the Encircling Ocean, and other places, bodies of water, etc. marked in black and red ink; portions lost due to trimming; on fol.14a a framed chart with partial table of contents; on fol.51b a diagram in black and red ink for finding the direction of Makkah based on one's location with illustration of the Kaʻbah at the center; on fol.191a a table in black and red ink for use in calculating dominance using the numerical values of names; text rubricated with section headings, textual dividers, etc. in red.", 'Script: Naskh; a small, clear hand with extremely vertical lāms and alifs, generally free of serifs, shaddah is generally marked; hamzah and waṣlah not marked; ihmāl signs often used over unpointed letters; a larger naskh is frequently used for section headings; thoroughly vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page; frame-ruled (using a misṭarah) though oddly at times, see fol. 151a where the writing does not extend to the end of the rulings.', 'Collation: i, 1 (1), III (7), 18 V (187), III (193) ; chiefly quinions; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals is present for quires 13, 14, 17, 18, 19 in the top outer corner of the first folio of each quire; catchwords present; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (referenced in cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "وبتمامه تم الكتاب بحمد الله الكريم الوهاب كان الفراغ من نسخه قبل الظهر ببدهل في يوم الاثنين المبارك عشري شهر جمادى الاولى من شهور سنة تسعين وتسعماية <...> على يد افقر عباد الله تعالى واحوجهم الى عفو ربه ومغفرته ورضوانه العبد الفقير احمد بن محمد بن عبد الدائم بن محمد بن سليمان البدهلي الشافعي"', 'Explicit: "و هذه خاتمة الارجوزة وما حوت من حكم عزيزة"', 'Incipit: "قل لا يعلم من في السماوات والأرض الغيب إلا الله الحمد لله غافر الذنب قابل التوب شديد العقاب عالم الغيب ... وبعد فان خالق الخلق والبدية ومن له الارادة و المشيئة قد ميز الملوك والرعاة عن من دونهم من الرعية"', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf.', 'Ms. codex.', '4. fol. 191a-192b : Faṣl fī mawḍūʻ al-shaṭranj / Ibn al-Habbārīyah [?].', '3. fol.191a : Hādhā jadwal fīhi ḥisāb al-ghālib wa-al-maghlūb.', '2. fol.187b-191a : Qilādat al-durr al-manthūr fī dhikr al-baʻth wa-al-nushūr / ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz al-Dīrīnī.', '1. fol.1a-187b : Kharīdat al-ʻajāʼib wa farīdat al-gharāʼib / Zayn al-Dīn ʻUmar ibn al-Muẓaffar Ibn al-Wardī [?].', 'Cosmography, mainly plagiarized from the Jāmiʻ al-funūn wa-salwat al-maḥzūn of Najm al-Dīn al-Ḥarrānī (ca.732/1332). Authorship of the Kharīdah is disputed. It is often attributed to Abū Ḥafṣ Sirāj al-Dīn ʻUmar ibn Muḥammad Ibn al-Wardī (d.861/1457) whose name al-Ziriklī gives as al-Wurūdī, though in this ms. it is ascribed to Zayn al-Dīn Ibn al-Wardī (d.749/1349). It has also been attributed to an ʻUmar Ibn al-Wardī al-Subkī. (see EI2 "Ibn al- Wardī , Sirādj al-Dīn Abū Ḥafṣ ʻUmar" and Sellheim, R. Materialen zur arabischen Literaturgeschichte, t. I, no. 49 for more on this matter of disputed authorship). The text concludes with excerpts from a poem on the resurrection, a table for numerological calculations of dominance using names, and verses on the game of chess. Description provided by Noah Gardiner.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 860 v.8', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.279, transcription completed 12 Jumādá I 1095 [ca. 27 April 1684] (where numeral khamsah looks like reverse B).', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with note "counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" -- b. Scrap with inscription in ink describing contents "Rawḍat al-Safā vol. 6 [crossed through] 8 A.H. 1089" -- c. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Meredith-Owens notes".', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 9 v.8', 'Binding: Boards covered in light brown leather perhaps once decorated in "marbled calf" manner ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in a dark blue wove paper ; spine in dark green and brown leather, gold-stamped with decorative bands and title "ROOZUT OL SUFA 8" ; edges of text block red-flecked ; sewn in white thread over four recessed cords ; worked Western style endbands, fairly good condition ; overall in fair condition though with deterioration of treated leather, joints splitting, etc. ; repairs to joints in light brown leather.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper of two main types ; opening (through p.98) in a type with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly distinct) and single chain lines occasionally visible, thin and transluscent though quite sturdy, buff to beige in color, well-burnished ; thereafter (p.98 to close) in a type with 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat distinct) and single chain lines faintly visible, cloudy formation, somewhat thick, sturdy, burnished, beige in color ; some pest damage, staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Keywords and headings rubricated ; overlining in red ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas.', 'Script: Naskh and nastaʻlīq ; two elegant and compact Persianate hands ; opening through p.98 in naskh, partially but irregularly seriffed with slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots, closed and open counters ; p.99 to close in fine nastaʻlīq, serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and somewhat exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 23 and 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 6 IV(48), IV-1 (55), 5 IV(95), IV-1 (102), 4 IV(134), IV-3 (139), ii ; exclusively quaternions ; quite tightly bound with sewing difficult to examine but middle of the quire marks in the form of black oblique strokes appear in the four outer corners of the central opening of each gathering ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inner flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "السلام تاریخ شد تمام بتاریخ ١٢ شهر جمادى الاول سنه ١٠٩٥"', 'Explicit: "سیر فلک یاد بکامش مدام نامه امید بنامش تمام"', 'Incipit: "خاتمه در بدایع و صنایع و آنچه نکاشته کلک قدرت اوست ..."', 'Title from rubricated heading at opening on p.4.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the eighth volume or Khātimah of the celebrated universal history Rawz̤at al-ṣafāʼ fī sīrat al-anbiyāʼ va al-mulūk va al-khulafāʼ by the Tīmūrid historian Muḥammad ibn Khvāndshāh Mīr Khvānd (d.1498) and completed by his nephew Ghiyās̲ al-Dīn Khvāndamīr (d.1535).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 511', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; paper suggests 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: From inscription on inner front cover and spine label, "IL 114" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Limp cover in heavy dark green paper ; oversewn in white thread ; traces of headband ; housed in envelope.', 'Support: European laid paper with 20 laid lines in 16 mm. (vertical) and regularly spaced chain lines (roughly 20-22 mm. apart, horizontal) ; watermarks difficult to discern but include bar with name or initials.', 'Decoration: Section headings and keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of three dots in red ; written area surrounded by red rule-border (occasionally with additional black fillet).', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Turkish hand ; partially and inconsistently seriffed, mainly on stand-alone letters and lām alif ligature but also on some alifs and lāms ; effect of slight tilt to the left ; partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: 5 V(50), III (56) ; quinions with final ternion ; final two leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil (supplied during cataloguing).', 'Explicit: "قوله كالفانج [كالفالج؟] هو البعير العظيم الذى له سنامان قال محمد عفا الله عنه إنى قد انهيت كتابي هذا الى اخره والحمد لله وحده وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم تسليما كثيرا الى يوم الدين وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل تم تم تم"', 'Incipit: "قال الشيخ الامام العالم العلامة حجة الدين أبو عبد الله محمد بن ابي محمد بن محمد بن ظفر رحمه الله تعالى ورضي عنه وارضاه وبمنه وكرمه الحمد الله مولي اوليائه الرفعة والتمكين ... وسميته خير البشر بخير البشر"', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1) and within preface on p.5.", 'Ms. codex.', "Clear copy of the work on predictions received by mankind on the subject of Muḥammad's prophetic mission. Description provided by Maxim Romanov."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 638', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.384, copied by ʻAlī ibn ʻAbd Allāh al-Zubayr al-Mulaykī [al-Malīkī] in his residence in qaryat al-Malḥukī (locale of the renowned Jāmiʻ al-Mulaykī [ جامع المليكي ], to the east of the city of Ibb, Yemen) with transcription completed 7 Rajab 1073 [February 1663]. As appears in preceding authorial colophon (also on p.384), composition completed Dhū al-Qaʻdah 826 [October-November 1423].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From label applied to interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 109" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip) ; "٣٥" on tail edge.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, now lost) ; board linings in yellow surface-dyed laid paper, recycled paper used for hinges ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped (with red leather onlays) mandorla (filled with vegetal composition vaguely reminiscent of Déroche class. OAi 11), pendants, cornerpieces, and domed accent pieces (at the mid-point of each board edge) along with border in tooled rules ; sewn in cream thread, two stations, some threads broken (e.g. quire 13 with sewing at p.200) ; opening gathering resewn in white thread, likely to secure cover worked chevron endbands in red and cream, intact though core and primaries exposed at spine ; overall in poor condition with flap entirely lost, abrasion and staining, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, cover fully detached at spine, etc. ; repairs to spine and corners of lower board in brown leather (also damaged with deterioration and losses, exposing spine lining, and supplemented by recycled paper on lower board).', 'Support: European [likely] laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. or 20 laid lines in roughly 22 mm. (horizontal) and single chain lines fairly regularly spaced at 24-25 mm. apart (vertical) though without visible watermark ; well-burnished, thick, sturdy and crisp ; some pest damage and staining.', 'Decoration: Lines of the poem, some headings and keywords rubricated, others in yellow or heavy black ink ; notabilia in the form of rubricated Hindu-Arabic numerals appear in the margins marking where the lines of the poem appear ; textual dividers in the form of yellow discs with red and black accents, black encircled dot with yellow accents, black encircled dot, and red discs (most closely resembling types 2, 3, and 19 in Regourd, Catalogue cumulé des bibliothèques de manuscrits de Zabid, fascicule 1).', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Yemeni hand in a narrow line ; mainly serifless, though sharp, right or left-sloping head-serif appears irregularly on occasional free-standing alif or lām of definite article, effect of tilt to the left, mainly curvilinear descenders (some sweeping), somewhat casually pointed with pointing for two and three dots in distinct or conjoined dots (ṭāʼ occasionally marked with dot below), mix of closed and open counters, some free assimilation of letters, yāʼ of في often mardūdah, partially vocalized ; keywords / headings in larger, bolder script (heavier line) approaching tawqīʻ.', 'Layout: Written in 35 lines per page ; written area often divided to two or three columns to set off poetry ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board / misṭarah evident).', 'Collation: 23 IV (184), IV+1 (193) ; chiefly quaternions ; quire numbering in the form of full words appearing in the upper outer corer of the recto of the opening leaf of each quire (see p.17, 33, etc.) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between p.251 and p.252).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," rectangular, reads "قال المصنف رحمه الله تعالى وكان الفراغ من هذا المصنف المبارك في شهر ذي القعدة الحرام سنة ست وعشرين وثمانمائة وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل نعم المولى ونعم النصير" ; "Scribal," rectangular, reads "وافق الفراغ من نساخة هذا الشرح المبارك بحمد الله ومنه وتيسيره واعانته ظهر يوم الاربعا سابع شهر رجب الاصم احد شهور سنة ثلاث وسبعين والف من الهجرة الطاهرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلاة والتسليم وكان ذلك بخط الفقير الى الله علي بن عبد الله الزبير المليكي في منزله المبارك في قرية الملحكي حرسها الله تعالى بالصالحين"', 'Explicit: "وما تقرر من البحث مع المقصر في نظمه ما يتفرق به شمل مجاميع الادب وتنسى تذكاره وقد انتهت الغاية بحمد الله الى حسن الختام واوردت فيه ما لا خفيت محاسنه على المتأمل ولا ضمه صدر كتاب وانا اسأل الله حسن الخاتمة ببركة الممدوح عليه افضل الصلاة والسلام"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله البديع الرفيع الذي احسن ابتداء خلقنا بصنعته واولنا جميل الصنيع ... وبعد فهذه البديعية التي نسجتها بمدحه صلى الله عليه وسلم على منوال طرح [؟] البردة ... فجاءت بديعية هدمت بها ما نحته الموصلي في بيوته من الجبال وجاريت الصفى مقيدا بتسمية النوع وهو من ذلك محلول العقال وسميته [سميتها] بتقديم ابي بكر ... فقلت لي في ابتدا مدحكم يا عرب ذي سلم ..."', 'Title from inscription on slip affixed to upper board lining.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of the author's commentary on his poem in praise of the Prophet, al-Badīʻīyah or Taqdīm Abī Bakr. Contents listing on opening leaf (p.1)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 551', 'Origin: As appears in colophon (fol.221a-b), copying finished ("katabahu...qad waqaʻa al-ikhtitām") by Ibn Muṣṭafá al-Shaykh Muḥammad al-Zaghrawī al-ʻAtīqī, known as nāʼib Ḥalabī on Friday the ninth tenth of the first third of the fifth sixth of the first half of the eighth tenth of the eighth tenth after one thousand of the Hijrah = Friday, the ninth of Jumādá I 1078 / ca. 27 October 1667.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda', 'Former shelfmark: From front inner cover "IL 109a" (likely supplied by Yahuda) ; from second front flyleaf "B. I. 373 II. 97".', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered dark purple straight-grained leather ; Type II binding (with flap), two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in emerald green coated wove paper ; upper and lower covers carry faded, gold-painted floral spray filling central rectangular panel, as well as tooled and gold-painted borders ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in white and magenta over yellow primaries ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support: European paper of several different types ; one type with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 26-28 mm. apart (vertical), watermark of crown-star-crescent (70 mm. long, parallel to chains, compare Mošin and Grozdanovic-Pajié type V. A., see p.20, 72, 438, etc.), and countermark "V d" under trefoil (see p.82, etc.) ; another, slightly thinner type with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (vertical), watermark of three hats (tre cappelli, see p.18, etc.) and countermark of "P A" under trefoil (see p.14, 36, 64, etc.) ; a few other countermarks visible as well ; all well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Section headings, notabilia (side-heads, such as "مطلب"), and overlining rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of three dots.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) ; small, compact hand in a medium line (same hand supplying both works) ; serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, some elongation of horizontal strokes, letteforms characteristic of nastaʻlīq, point of final or free-standing nūn often either conjoined with bowl or set down within.', 'Layout: Written in 31 lines per page.', 'Collation: ii, I (2), 12 V (122), III (128), V (138), IV+1 (147), 7 V (217), II+1 (222), ii ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; each work foliated in red Hindu-Arabic numerals (upper left corner of recto for each folio beginning from the folio following the incipit page) ; pagination added later in pencil.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, "حمدا لك اللهم على ما منحت لي من التكميل والاختتام وصلوة على من حث عبادك على التعلم والتعليم والاعلام حيث قال العلماء ورثة الانبياء العظام خصوصا في احاديث الاخر بقوله عليه السلام ... كتبه الفقير الى رحمة ربه القدير ابن مصطفى الشيخ محمد الزغروي العتيقي الشهير بنائب حلبي في البلدان وبابن ميرالآي في الاوطان اللهم اغفر لي ولوالدي ولمن علمنا ولمن علمهم ولمن قال به امين لمن دعا لمصنفه ولكاتبه واجعلهم في الدارين ... قد وقع الاختتام في يوم الجمعة وهو العشر التاسع من الثلث الاول من السدس الخامس من النصف الاول من العشر الثامن من العشر الثامن بعد الالف من هجرة من له العز والشرف"', 'Explicit: "ولو طلب كافر من مسلم ان يعلمه القران والفقه فلا بائس به رجاء على ان يطلع على محاسنه فيسلم كذا ذكر في التحفة والله تعالى الموفق الى السبيل الراشد واليه المرجع والمأب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله حمدا بعدد ما اظهر من معدن الازن بو اقبت [?] ودررا...و بعد فان العبد الضعيف احمد بن محمد بن ابي بكر خصته الله ترفاته واسلافه برحمته يقول لما فرغت من تسويد مجمع الفتاوى الذي جمعت في كتب العلماء العظام والمشايخ الكرام الولها فتاوى الكبرى والصغرى للصدر الشهيد..."', 'Title from fol. 1a.', 'Ms. codex.', '3. fol.126b-fol.222b : Lisān al-ḥukkam fī maʻrifat al-aḥkām / Ibrāhīm ibn Muḥammad Ibn al-Shiḥnah ; Burhān al-Dīn Ibrāhīm al-Khāliʻī al-ʻAdawī.', '2. fol.125b-fol.126a : [glosses and excerpts].', '1. fol.1a-fol.125b : Khizānat al-fatāwā / Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr al-Ḥanafī.', '[1] Khizānat al-fatāwā, a compendium of legal decisions; followed by [2] Lisān al-ḥukkām fī maʻrifat al-aḥkām of Ibrāhīm ibn Muḥammad Abū al-Walīd Ibn al-Shiḥnah al-Ḥalabī (d. 882/1477), a legal treatise in 30 chapters of which only 21 are included in this copy, and which were begun by Ibn al-Shiḥnah and completed by Burhān al-Dīn Ibrāhīm al-Khāliʻī [or al-Khālifī] al-ʻAdawī in 1027/1618. Each work is preceded by a table of contents. Extensive marginal commentary and reading notes.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 577', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.208, transcription completed 13 Shawwāl 1142 [ca. 1 May 1730].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Insert with notes (paginated pp.95-96).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 110" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in tan leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in yellow laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped mandorla and pendants (with now greenish onlays), as well as tooled rule-border ; sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked endbands mainly gone though traces of tailband remain ; overall in poor condition with lifting and losses of leather (especially at spine), much abrasion and staining, upper cover detaching, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper mainly with 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of three crescents (88 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p. 32, 33, etc.) and six mounts with cross above and text beneath (see p.30, 35, 154, etc. and compare Monts - Six monts imbriqués nos.6-9 in Velkov, Les Filigranes dans les documents Ottomans) ; medium cream in color, sturdy and well-burnished ; some staining.', 'Decoration: Section headings and keywords rubricated ; occasional textual divider in the form of hāʼ in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Turkish hand ; partially seriffed with occasional left-sloping head-serif on joined alif, marked tilt to the left, occasional descent of words to baseline, mainly curvilinear descenders, pointing in conjoined dots or strokes, freely ligatured (point of final nūn often assimilated with bowl, etc.).', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 10 V(100), 2 (102) ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "قد تمت كتابة هذه [كذا] المجلد المبارك في يوم الثالث عشر شهر شوال سنة الف مائة اثنين واربعين تم تم تم"', 'Explicit: "فقال ما دام احد الحرام ليس اعمل بالحلال يكفر تمت الكتاب بعناية الله المرشد بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب المسمى بخزانة الفقه عن تأليف الشيخ العالم الزاهد الفقيه المحقق والمدقق ابو الليث السمرقندي رحمة الله عليه وعلى جميع الفقهاء الدين [كذا] الصالحين والمشايخ الكبار والصغار من امة محمد عليه الصلوة والسلام الى يوم الحشر والقيام"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه الطيبين الطاهرين اعلم ان الفقه علم حسن وهو اجل العلوم وهو علم الدين والشريفة وقوام الشريفة به ... وقد اجتمع فيه فضائل الفقه معدودة الاجناس مجموعة النظائر تسهيلا في التحفظ وتيسرا للفهم ... وسميته خزانة الفقه ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.4 and closing matter on p.208.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Clear copy of the handbook of Ḥanafī law by Abū al-Layth al-Samarqandī.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 288', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.105, copied by Muḥammad al-Qivām [al-Qavām], al-Kātib al-Shīrāzī, likely in Shīrāz (see Lâle Uluç\'s article, "A Persian epic, perhaps for the Ottoman sultan," p.57) with transcription completed Dhū al-Qaʻdah 954 [December 1547-January 1548].', 'Former shelfmark: "394 T. D. M." [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis] inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.1).', "Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings and hinges in shell 'marbled' paper (in mainly brown and blue) ; fore edge flap lined in silk ; upper and lower covers carry 'gold'-stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition - now damaged, recessed onlays now gone to green) and cornerpieces with tooled rosette accents and border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in dark pink and green, fairly good condition ; overall in fair condition with some staining, abrasion, some lifting of leather, etc.", 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal and fairly indistinct with some curving), quite sturdy and well-burnished though transluscent.', 'Decoration: Elegant (though damaged) illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ ) at opening on p.2 consisting of large rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying opening title ("خلاصه خمسه") in white surrounded by swirling arabesque with floral motifs (in gold, light blue, white, yelow, pink, red, etc.) on fields of lapis lazuli and gold (evoking book cover design), surmounted by rectangular piece with row of swirling arabesque on fields of lapis lazuli and gold, all surrounded by border in blue with white crosses and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area of incipit and facing page set off by cloud-bands consisting of vegetal designs in green, pink and red on a gold ground ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of a series of gold, red, and light blue rules defined by black fillets ; some keywords and section headings chrysographed, others in blue ink.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, elongated horizontal strokes of exaggerated thickness.', 'Layout: Written in 10 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV-2 (6), 5 IV(46), IV-1 (53) ; exclusively quaternions (two anonmalous) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, in Arabic, reads "تم الكتاب بعون الله وحسن توفيقه والصلوة والسلام على محمد واله اجمعين في تاريخ شهر ذي قعده سنه اربع وخمسين وتسعمائة على يد تراب الاقدام محمد القوام الكاتب الشيرازى "', 'Explicit: "بآهستگی [به آهستگی] کار عالم برآر که در کار گرمی نیاید بکار [به کار]"', 'Incipit: "بر اصحاب دولت و ارباب مکنت واجب و لازمست ..."', 'Title from illuminated headpiece at opening on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of a selection of excerpts from Niẓāmī's Khamsah, divided into 37 chapters (باب) each addressing a subject relating to piety, ethics, or etiquette (see pp.5-8 for a listing of the chapters). For a similar abridgement of Khamsah-i Niẓāmī, see Isl. Ms. 289. Contributions to the cataloguing from Ali Rafi."])

en: (count: ['[4] Jamāl al-Dīn ʻAbd Allāh ibn Khalīl al-Qāhirī al-Māridīnī, Hādhihi risālah fī al-ʻamal bi-al-rubʻ al-mujayyab, pp. [22-29]; [5] Saḥnūn ibn ʻUthmān al-Wansharīshī, Sihām al-rabṭ fī al-mukhammas al-khālī al-wasṭ, p. [30]; [6] ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Muḥammad al-Akhḍarī, Azhar al-maṭālib fī hayʼat al-falāk wa-al-kawākib, pp. [31-43]; [7] Waḍʻ al-dāʼirah al-handasīyah fī maʻrifat zawāl kull yawm, p. [44].', 'Pp. 1-48. Bound with: [2] Ibn al-Maʻrūlī, Hādhihi risālah fī al-asṭurlāb, pp. [1-14]; [3] Hādhihi risālah min risālat al-shaykh al-muʻaddil bi-Gharnāṭah ṣāḥib al-awqāt bi-hā Abū al-Ḥasan ʻAlī ibn Abī Jaʻfar ibn Aḥmad ibn Yūsuf ibn Nāṣir al-Aslīmī, pp. [14-20];', 'Definitive proof drawn from the Bible that the earth does not rotate on an axis.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 269', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon, but likely mid 19th century as suggested by paper. Opening matter on fol.2b (p.4) indicates that composition of main work was finished in 1207 [1792-1793].', 'Accompanying materials: a. envelope in blue wove paper printed in French, Ottoman Turkish, Greek and Armenian with the mark of a pharmacy in "مقری کوی" [Makrıköy, Istanbul] accompanied by inscription in ink, ruqʻah script with name, etc. "عزتلو اسمائل بك افندى ..." -- b. between fol.119-120 (p.238-239) a slip inscribed with names, etc. in black ink, Ottoman hand.', "Binding: Heavy pasteboards covered in red orange leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in blue-tinted, gold-flecked paper ; flyleaves in untinted (cream to dark cream) wove paper ; upper and lower covers bear simple tooled (with s-shaped stamp) and gold-painted outer border with inner rulings of gold-painted fillets ; sewn in pink-cream thread, two stations ; finely worked chevron endbands in yellow (soiled and faded to cream) and maroon ; in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, edge wear, gashes, etc. ; endbands in excellent condition ; cover still very well-attached to textblock despite the book's heft.", 'Support: European laid paper of at least two types [1] in opening quire, final quire, etc. vertical chain lines very evenly spaced at 25 mm. apart, any laid lines are too fine to be visible, dark cream, burnished ; watermarks include "PICARDO" with six petaled flower above, alternating with lion in scrollwork in other leaves (as in Heawood 3737, c.1825 Lisbon) and [2] in final folio, etc. chain lines vertical evenly spaced 29 mm. apart, laid lines horizontal spaced roughly 11 laid lines per cm., quite even and distinct, well-burnished, dark cream color ; watermarks include latin cross in minor scrollwork shield, initials "G B" below (final folio) ; in second to final folio "BELLANDO" ; in fourth to final folio "GRILLO" with figure on ball/pedestal (very similar to Heawood 1364-1365) above ; some burnishers marks ; pigment burn (especially blue in illuminated headpieces).', 'Decoration: Well-executed illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) on fol.1b (p.2) consists of narrow rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche and flanking accents in gold, blue, red, and pink surmounted by tall scalloped semi-circular (dome) approaching w-shaped piece with intricate swirling floral vegetal pattern in black, blue, pink, red, green, yellow, orange, white, and gold on fields of blue and gold ; similar illuminated headpiece appears on fol.312b (p.624) ; on fol.314b (p.628) and fol.316b (p.632) small illuminated headpieces, mainly gold resembling elongated cartouche with flanking accent pieces in white, blue, pink, yellow and red ; on fol.339a (p.677) an illuminated headpiece consisting of narrow rectangular piece carrying the basmalah surmounted by a piece giving the effect of an inverted w-shaped piece with swirling floral vegetal pattern similar to that appearing in the first headpieces ; throughout, text is surrounded by a frame consisting of a heavy gold band outlined by black fillets, an inner gold band and an outer blue fillet and then at some distance a second frame consisting of a thin gold band outlined by black fillets ; various columns and other areas of the written area are delineated by a thin gold band outlined by black fillets ; on incipit and facing page, margin filled with a swirling floral vegetal pattern in black, gold, red, and green ; text rubricated with keywords, section headings, overlining, etc. in red ; decorative tables of contents appear in main work ; a few diagrams appear in main work and several in appended works, see for example diagrams in treatise on prosody (divided concentric circles fol.318b-320a/p.636-639 and tree-like forms fol.320b/p.640) and in historical work (figure of fol.352b/p.704 showing the planets through Saturn in their orbits around the sun and figure of fol.359b/p.718 showing the circle of the Earth divided to its inhabited and uninhabited quarters).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; small, fine Persianate hand ; sans serif ; characteristic descent of words to baseline, superscript of final words/letters, letterforms, etc. ; tables of contents in the main work provided in an unpointed script (resembling siyāq / siyāqat), freely ligatured and with dramatic swooping tails.', 'Layout: Written in roughly 27 lines per page (though varies where tables of contents, figures, diagrams, etc. appear) ; mainly large single column, often divided to four columns where poetry appears but varies to accommodate tables of contents and figures ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board quite evident).', 'Collation: i, 38 IV (304), III+1 (311), IV+1 (320), 4 IV (352), I (354), III (360), 5 IV (400), I (402), i ; chiefly quaternions ; a few gaps in the text on fol.349b (p.698) where rubrics appear to be lacking ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "يعقوب شاه بن يوسف شاه است كه در سنه نهصد و نود و پنج برد ست اكبرى عاجز شده بهند آمد ودر سلك امرا منتظم كشت ازان باز كشمير سلاطين دهلى تعلق داشت حالا در تصرف شاه ابدالى است الحمد لله رب العالمين كه اين رساله جامع صفت اختتام يافت"', 'Incipit: "لالى منشور سپاس و ستايش باستحقاق نثار دامن كبرياي [؟] ناظمى تواند بود كه بمحض قدرت كامله گوهر پمانند سخن و معاني در عقد الفاظ ولسان نسائي [؟] كشيد و جواهر ... اما بعد ابجد خوان دبستان يحمداني [؟] ابو طالب ابن مغفور حاجى محمد تبريزى الاصفهانى بعرض اهوش و كوش سالكان مسالك سخداني مير ساند ... "', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from opening matter (preface) on fol.2b (p.4).', 'Ms. codex.', '7. fol.402a-402b : [blank].', '6. fol. 339a-401b : لب السير و جهان نما.', '5. fol. 321b-339a : رساله در مختصر قنون طب.', '4. fol. 316b-321b : رساله در علم عروض و قافيه.', '3. fol. 314b-316a : در مصطلحات مسيقى.', '2. fol. 312b-314b : رساله در علم اخلاق.', '1. fol. 1a-312a : خلاصة الافكار.', "Fine copy of Abū Ṭālib Khān Tabrīzī Iṣfahānī's Khulāṣat al-afkār, a taz̲kirah with notices for Persian poets and extracts from their works, followed by his treatises on moral behavior, music, prosody, and medicine as well as his universal history, Lubb al-siyar va jahānʹnumā."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 119', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.224, copied by ʻAlī ibn Muṣṭafá. Transcription of second work completed 12 Muḥarram 1129 [ca. 17 December 1716]. As appears in colophon on p.248, transcription of third work completed 28 Muḥarram 1129 [ca. 12 January 1717]. As appears in colophon on p.262, transcription of fourth work completed 23 Muḥarram 1129 [ca. 7 January 1717]. As appears in colophon on p.285, transcription of fifth work completed 15 Ṣafar 1126 [ca. 2 March 1714]. As appears in colophon on p.354, transcription of final work completed 20 Muḥarram 1129 [ca. 4 January 1717].', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 141. Risalah fi \'l-hisab."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in laid paper with spine, fore-edge flap, and edges/turn-ins in dark red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; worked endbands in pink and green, poor condition ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, severe lifting and losses of paper and leather (especially upper cover), delamination of boards, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (horizontal), and three hats watermark ; well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, numerals, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; occasional textual divders in the form of red discs ; some geometric diagrams in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, bold Turkish hand ; seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on nearly all vertical shafts ; effect of tilt to left ; many closed counters ; tapered descenders ; portion of text on p.300 supplied in a different hand.', 'Layout: Written in 17 and 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 2 V(20), IV (28), 7 V(98), 2 VI(122), V (132), IV+1 (141), 2 V(161), IV (169), III (175), ii ; chiefly quinions ; lacks proper catchwords, but last word of final line on the verso of each leaf is usually repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and skips two pages between pp.355-356).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب في سنة ۱۱۲۹ في الشهر المحرم في يوم ۱ ۲ على يد علي بن مصطفى غفر الله لهما ولوالديهما امين تم" ; "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت في سنة ۱۱۲۹ في شهر محرم في يوم ۲٨" ; "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم تم تم في سنة ۱۱۲۹ في شهر محرم في يوم ۲۳" ; "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم تم تم سنة ۱۱۲٦ في ص ۱٥" ; "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب سنة ۱۱۲۹ في شهر م في يوم ۲۰"', 'Incipit: [Khulāṣat al-ḥisāb] "نحمدك يا من لا يحيط بجميع نعمه عدد ... وبعد فهذه رسالة في الحساب مرتبة على مقدمة وعشرة ابواب" ; [Sharḥ Khulāṣat al-ḥisāb] "يا من عجز عن جميع تضاعف نعمه اقلام افهام العقلاء ... اما بعد فيقول الفقير الى الله الغني عمر بن احمد الشهير بالمائي والچلي رسمت فيما مضى في ايام التحصيل واثناء التدريس والتعطيل تعليقات على المواضع المشكلة وتنبيهات على رموز المباحث المفصلة في الرسالة البهائية في الحساب المشهور فيما بين اولى الالباب ..." ; [Risālah fī fī asmāʼ al-rusūm al-marsūmah ...] "الحمد لله حمدا يليق بجلاله والصلوة والسلام على خير خلقه محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين وبعد فهذه رسالة مختصرة اذكر فيها اسماء الرسوم المرسومة على الالة المسماة بالاسطرلاب الشمالي ذات الصفائح وبعض اعمالها ..." ; [Risālah fī al-ʻamal bi-al-rubʻ al-marsūm bi-al-qanṭarāt] "قال الشيخ ...شهاب الدين احمد بن المجدي ... الحمد لله حمد الشاكرين وصلوته على سيدنا محمد واله الطيبين الطاهرين وبعد فهذه رسالة في العمل بالربع المرسوم بالقنطرات ..." ; [Risālah fī al-ʻamal bi-al-rubʻ al-mujayyab] "الحمد لله رب العالمين ... وبعد فهذه رسالة في العمل بالربع المجيب مشتملة على مقدمة وعشرين بابا ..." ; [Sharḥ al-Muqaddimah al-mukhtaṣarah ...] "اي الف والاسم مشتق في السمو وهو العلو ..."', 'Title supplied by catloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '13. p.288-p.354 : [Sharḥ al-Muqaddimah al-mukhtaṣarah fī maʻrifat istikhrāj aʻmāl al-layl wa-al-nahār min rubʻ al-dāʼirah].', '12. p.287 : [blank].', '11. p.286 : ["Jadwal ṭūl al-buldān ..."].', '10. p.270-p.285 : Risālah fī al-ʻamal bi-al-rubʻ al-mujayyab / Badr al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad Sibṭ al-Māridīnī.', '9. p.269 : [Excerpt addressing "maʻrifat darajat al-shams bi-al-taqrīb"].', '8. p.263-p.268 : [blank].', '7. p.250-p.262 : Risālah fī al-ʻamal bi-al-rubʻ al-marsūm bi-al-qanṭarāt / Shihāb al-Dīn Aḥmad ibn Rajab ibn al-Majdī.', '6. p.249-250 : [Excerpt from "Risālah min rasāʼil al-asṭurlāb," etc.]', '5. p.226-p.248 : [Risālah fī asmāʼ al-rusūm al-marsūmah ʻalá al-ālah al-musammāh bi-al-asṭurlāb al-shamālī dhāt al-ṣafāʼih].', '4. p.225 : [blank].', '3. p.62-p.224 : [Sharḥ al-Risālah al-Bahāʼīyah fī al-ḥisāb] / ʻUmar ibn Aḥmad al-Māʼī al-Chillī.', '2. p.58-p.61 : [blank].', '1. p.6-p.57 : Khulāṣat al-ḥisāb / Bahāʼ al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Ḥusayn al-ʻĀmilī.', "Fine copy of a collection of treatises pertaining to mathematics and astronomy, including Bahāʼ al-Dīn al-ʻĀmilī's manual of arithmetic, a commentary on the same by ʻUmar ibn Aḥmad al-Māʼī al-Chillī (fl. 17th cent.), an anonymous treatise on the astrolabe, a treatise on the astrolabic quadrant by Ibn al-Majdī (d.1447), a treatise on the use of the sine quadrant by Sibṭ al-Māridīnī (b. 1423), and an anonymous commentary on a treatise on time reckoning by Yaḥyá ibn Muḥammad al-Ḥaṭṭāb (d.1586 or 7). Brief excerpts (as well as a table) on astronomical topics are found between these main works."])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Three hats. Cf. Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), nos. 2593 and 2597.', 'Contains geometrical diagrams and tables.', 'Text rubricated; substantial marginal notes in hand of copyist.', "Date, copyist's name, and provenance in colophon: qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min taḥrīr al-risālah al-ḥisāb ʻalá yad ... ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Yaʻqūb al-Muftī Bayburd Arḍurūm sābiqan fī yawm al-khāmis ʻashar min shahr Muḥarram al-ḥarām fī waqt qarīb ghurūb zakāʾ fī madrasat Sulṭān Sulaymān al-marḥūm ... sanat 1112 [2 July 1700].", 'For other copies of this text see Mich. Isl. Mss. 732 and 815,2.', '"Treatise on arithmetic, in a muḳaddima and 10 bābs, with glosses and marginal commentary (unidentified) through the eighth bāb, and a number of loose leaves and slips laid in." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: GiorMagnani Almasso with scrollwork. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), no. 3748.', 'Contains geometrical diagrams and tables.', 'Text rubricated; borders in blue and red; marginal notes in hand of copyist.', 'For other copies of this text see Mich. Isl. Mss. 731 and 815,2.', '"A compendium of arithmetic." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 289', 'Origin: According to colophon on fol.45a, copying finished in Shawwāl 955 [November-December 1548]. Copyist is not named.', 'Accompanying materials:', 'Binding: Pasteboard covered in red-brown leather and marbled paper; Type III binding (without flap); doublures covered in yellow laid paper (chain lines 22 mm apart; 16 laid lines per 20 mm); not original to codex; in good condition.', 'Support: non-European (Persian) laid paper with laid lines running horizontally at roughly 9 laid lines per cm., chain lines not visible.', 'Decoration: Illuminated frontispiece (fol.1b-2a) features vegetal designs, executed in lapis lazuli and gold, which are nearly mirror-images of each other; consist of three, linked, vertically-oriented, circular patterns of vines emerging from a large, seven-pointed leaf at the center of the central circular figure; the workmanship is of the highest caliber; illuminated headpiece on incipit page (fol.2b) consists of a single lapis-lazuli arched semi-circular piece dominated by two cartouches in gold; the lower carries the title of the work, the upper one carries a small, light-blue and gold flower, which serves as the anchor-point for a gold, circular pattern of vines that rotate out from that figure and surround the cartouche beneath it; vines are ornamented with tiny golden leaves and pink, red, green, and black flowers; upward slopes of the arch are mirrored by two thick bands of gold at the bottom of the headpiece, which serve to further frame the cartouche; entire headpiece is framed by a thick band containing a golden braid, adorned with small figures in light-blue, green, red, pink, and brown that recall precious stones; a thinner frame in lapis-lazuli embellished with tiny white stars surrounds the headpiece and entire opening of fol.2b-3a; text of opening (dībāchah) is decorated with golden cloud-bands that are further enhanced with tiny red, green, blue, and pink flowers; throught, text is bordered by frame in lapis-lazuli and gold band; chapter headings and titles are framed with a single gold band; hemistiches are separated by two fine golden bands, spaced 4 mm apart.', 'Script: Nasta‘līq; single hand.', 'Layout: Written in 14 lines per page; single column of text with panel for each hemistich.', 'Collation: i, IV-1 (7), IV (15), V (25), III (31), IV (39), III+1 (46); catchwords present; pagination in pencil, Western numerals.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "تمت الکتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب في تاريخ شهر شوال سنه خمس و خمسين و تسعمايه الهجريه غريق رحمت يزدان کسى ام که کاتب را باحمدی کند شاد"', 'Explicit: "با هستگی کار عالم بساز که در کار کرمى نيايد بكار"', 'Incipit: "بعد از حمد باری تعالى عز اسمه و در دو بهترين کاينات محمد مصطفى صلى الله عليه و آله و سلم بر اصحاب دين و دولت و ارباب ملك و مكنت"', 'Title from headpiece on fol.2b.', 'Ms. codex.', "Excerpts from the five masnavis of Niẓāmī known as the Khamsah. compiler is not known. The work is divided into 37 chapters (باب) each addressing a subject relating to piety, ethics, or etiquette and containing verses from one or more of the five masnavis illustrating that chapter's topic. Table of contents of fol.3b-4a outlines the list of chapter topics. For a similar abridgement of Khamsah-i Niẓāmī, see Isl. Ms. 288. Description provided by Derek Mancini-Lander."])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Three hats; initials AFG in roman.', 'Text rubricated and has overlining in red; marginal notes in hand of copyist and others.', 'For a complete copy of this work see Mich. Isl. Ms. 750,1.', 'Pp. [2-21]. Bound with: Badr al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad Sibṭ al-Māridīnī, Risālah fī al-ʻamal bi-al-rubʻ al-mujayyab, pp. [24-47].', 'Abridgment by the author of his Iẓhār al-sirr al-mawḍūʻ fī al-ʻamal bi-al-rubʻ al-maqṭūʻ, "on the use of the almucantar quadrant." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 80. Copy defective; text missing from end of bāb 10 tobāb 15.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Scrollwork.', 'Text and marginal notes rubricated; marginal notes and corrections in hand of copyist; foliation added by copyist (?).', "Possible early to mid-18th cent. date based on author's death date.", '"A treatise on timekeeping in 23 bābs." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 111. Marginal note on p. [1] refers to works of Ḥasan al-Jabartī on timekeeping.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 828', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.42, transcription of opening work completed 27 Muḥarram 1238 [ca. 14 October 1822]. Transcription of second work and addendum likely completed around the same time.', 'Binding: Pasteboards (very thin, only a few layers) now covered in printed laid paper (in blue-green) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures (board linings) in splendid block-printed paper with floral and fruit motifs (carnations, etc.) in dark blue, red, yellow and green ; sewn in black thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in black and cream, fairly good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with signficant abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of paper, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of two types ; opening type (appears toward close of volume as well) with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 30 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of a bird on a pedestal (see p.6, 16, 20, 28, 30, 31, etc.), thin and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished to glossy ; next type with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 32 mm. apart (vertical), and watermarks including crescent (visible in p.54, 58, 62, 64, 86, etc.) and "S" (visible in p.84, 100, etc.).', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and symbols rubricated ; written area surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Naskh ; mainly one clear, Turkish hand ; partially but irregularly seriffed with effect of tilt to the left, quite rounded with curvilinear descenders, many open counters, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots ; incipit page of second work (p.44) in a different hand.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 4 V(40), VI (52), IV (60) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between pp.59-60).', 'Colophon: [Kifayetü\'l-vakit li-marifeti\'d-dair ve fazle ve\'s-semt] "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمت رسالۀ مقنطره سنه ١٢٣٨ فى ٢٨ م يوم الاثنين"', 'Explicit: [Kifayetü\'l-vakit li-marifeti\'d-dair ve fazle ve\'s-semt] "سمت قبله يه مطابق اولدى قبله دخى قوس ارتفاعك طرفنه واقع اولدى" ; [Risale-yi ceyb-i afaki] "صويه وارنجه درنلكى سكزبجق زراع اولدى وقس على هذا تمت م"', 'Incipit: [Kifayetü\'l-vakit li-marifeti\'d-dair ve fazle ve\'s-semt] "الحمد لله الذى جعل على البحر الاحضر [الاخضر] الفلك قناطير المقطنراة ... وبعد بو افقر عباد الله مصطفى بن على الموقت بالجامع الحاقانى السليمو ... وبو رسالۀ كفاية الوقت لمعرفت الدائر وفضله والسمت برله تسميه ايلدم ..." ; [Risale-yi ceyb-i afaki] "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين آلات ارتفاعيه دن ربع الدائرى تصبير ... آلت ارتفاعينك جيب طرفنده اولان دوائر وخطوطك بياننده دير قوس الارتفاع ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from opening matter of first work (p.4) and rubricated heading at opening of second work (p.44).', 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.115-p.117 : Tarik-i eshel-i ceyb-i irtifa.', '3. p.44-p.114 : Risale-yi ceyb-i âfakî/ Mustafa bin Ali Muvakkit.', '2. p.43 : [blank].', "1. p.4-p.42 : Kifayetü'l-vakit li-marifeti'd-dair ve fazle ve's-semt / Mustafa bin Ali Muvakkit.", 'Careful copy of two treatises by Muvakkit Mustafa b. Ali (d.1571), timekeeper in the mosque of Sultan Selim II (r.1566-1574), the first on the use of the almucantar or bridged quadrant (rubʻ al-muqanṭarāt) in 12 bābs and the second on the use of the sine quadrant (rubʻ mujayyab) in 22 bābs (compare his Vafiyetü’l-evkat and Rub-i müceyyeb).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 829', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.108, both works apparently copied by Hacı Hafız Ömer (al-Ḥājj Ḥāfiẓ ʻUmar) with transcription completed 1232 [1816 or 1817].', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (mainly in shades of orange, red, and blue) with brown leather over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins (framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations ; overall in somewhat poor condition with some staining, abrasion, moisture damage, spine slant (slightly cocked), warping, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (vertical), and lion watermark (tail and face visible in p.14, 15, 86, etc. and legs and ground visible in p.10, 20, 110, etc.) ; staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Some keywords and section headings rubricated, others overlined in red ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Turkish hand ; partially and somewhat irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on occasional lām, ṭāʼ, etc. as well as shaqq of kāf, quite rounded with curvilinear descenders, pointing (for two and three dots) in curved strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: I (2), 5 V(52), II (56) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تمت ۱۲۳۲ حرره الحاج حافظ عمر غفر الله ذنوبه تم"', 'Explicit: [Kifayetü\'l-vakit li-marifeti\'d-dair ve fazle ve\'s-semt] "سمت قبليه مطابق اولدى قبله سى قوس ارتفاعك طرفنه واقع اولدى تمت بعون الملك الوهاب تم" ; [Teshilü\'l-mikat fî ilmi\'l-evkat] "بلدك كى اول قيونك در يكلكى طقوز زراعدر"', 'Incipit: [Kifayetü\'l-vakit li-marifeti\'d-dair ve fazle ve\'s-semt] "الحمد لله الذى جعل على البحر الاحضر [الاخضر] الفلك قناطير المقطنرات ... بو احقر عباد الله مصطفى بن على الموقت بالجامع الحاقانى السليمى ... وبو رسالۀ كفاية الوقت المعرفة [لمعرفة] الدائر وفضله والسمت برله تسميه ايله دم ..." ; [Teshilü\'l-mikat fî ilmi\'l-evkat] "الحمد لله عالم الغيب فلا يغرب عن عمله مثقال ذرة فى الارض ولا فى السماء ... اما بعد بو عبد ضعيف المحتاج الى رحمة ربه اللطيف مصطفى بن على الموقت بجامع الحاقانى السليمى بواه الله ديمكله متعارف اولان آلتده كه آلات رصديه ايجنده افاقى اولوب ... وبو رسالۀ تسهيل الميقات وتعيين الاوقات ديو تسميه ايلدم ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from opening matter of first work (p.6) and opening matter of second work (p.43).', 'Ms. codex.', '5. p.109-p.112 : [blank].', "4. p.42-p.108 : Teshilü'l-mikat fî ilmi'l-evkat / Mustafa bin Ali Muvakkit.", "3. p.6-p.42: Kifayetü'l-vakit li-marifeti'd-dair ve fazle ve's-semt / Mustafa bin Ali Muvakkit.", '2. p.5 : [blank].', '1. p.2-p.4 : [contents listing].', 'Careful copy of two treatises by Muvakkit Mustafa b. Ali (d.1571), timekeeper in the mosque of Sultan Selim II (r.1566-1574), the first on the use of the almucantar or bridged quadrant (rubʻ al-muqanṭarāt) in 12 bābs and the second on timekeeping (ʻilm al-mīqāt) and the use of the sine quadrant (rubʻ mujayyab) in 22 bābs. Contents listing for both works on added leaves at opening (pp.2-4).'])

en: (count: ['Copy completed: Shaʻbān 982/ November 1574 in the hand of Qāsim b. Ḥājī Mīrzā.', 'Text written in clear black naskh script with rubrication. Text bordered in blue and gold lines throughout.', 'Initial page has medallion design with gold, including gold and red floral patterns on blue paint. The title of the work is no longer apparent in the center medallion. First page of the text has ʻunwān in similar colors and design. Title of work is also missing from this location. Volume has edge title, but spelled "kimiyā-yi saʻādat" instead of "kīmiyā-yi saʻādat".', 'Leather bound codex with intricate tooling on upper and lower covers; some residue of gold paint in design. Doublures feature elaborate leather filigree on red leather with gold and paint which overlays a blue painted background. Both covers are detached.', 'Translated as "The Alchemy of Bliss," this most famous work of al-Ghazālī, written in Persian, presents the religious and ethical obligations of the true Muslim from a mystical perspective. It is considered an abridgement of his extensive Arabic work, Iḥyā ʻulūm al-dīn.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1036', 'Origin: As appears in final colophon on fol.210a, copied by Faḍīl ibn Jalāl al-Dīn Nāʼīnī (see colophon at the close of juzʼ II for his full name "فضيل بن جلال الدين بن ابن حاجى محمد طاهر ابن خواجه احمد ولد سلغور شاه ولد عماده شاه ولد سلغور شاه نائينى"). Transcription finished ("tamma kitāb Baṣāʼir al-darajāt...) 1 Rabīʻ II 1072 [ca. 24 November 1661]. According to colophon following juzʼ III on fol.173a (p.345), copied in a school in the quarter / district (محله) of al-Karrān (perhaps in Isfahan).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 185', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in blue-green paper with red goatskin over spine and board corners (half-bound); Type III (without flap); pastedowns and flyleaves in what appears to be European wove paper with an embossed mark in French cursive italic script "Super Cour d\'Auvergne. TSL[?]"; very worn, upper cover detached from text block, entire case detaching from textblock at spine; poor condition.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with laid lines running horizontally and spaced roughly 8 laid lines per cm., no chain lines visible plainly enough for measuring; many inclusions; flyleaves and pastedowns in a European wove paper with impressed mark in French cursive italic script "Super Cour d\'Auvergne. TSL[?]".', 'Decoration: Section headings rubricated ; overlinings and occasional textual dividers in the form of numeral khamsah in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine, neat Persianate hand; essentially serifless (though occasionally serif on alif of lām alif ligature), point of final and free-standing nūn set down within wide, angled bowl (reminiscent of nastaʻlīq), pointing in distinct dots, curvilinear descenders, superscripting of final letters and words.', 'Layout: Written in 14 lines per page; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, 25 IV (200), IV+2 (210), i; chiefly quaternions; catchwords present; leaves between each of the four ajzāʼ left partially blank and unmarked, but with no apparent loss of text; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied in cataloguing).', 'Colophon: [final] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم كتاب بصائر الدرجات بحمد الله وعونه وحسن توفيقه والحمد لله وحده [؟] والصلوة على من لا نبي بعده وذلك في غرة شهر ربيع الثاني سنة اثنان وسبعين والف وكتبه العبد الاذل المحتاج الى رحمة الله الغني ابن جلال الدين اكبر فضيل نائيني عفي عنهما" ; flanked by scribal verses in Persian, reading: "اي انكه ته اطالع مسعود بود دانى كه مرا از توچه مقصود بود يك فاتحه ازبهر نويسنده بخوان تاعاقبت كار تو محمود بود ان شاء الله" and duʻāʼ in Arabic, reading: "اللهم اغفر وارحم لكاتبه ولصاحبه برحمتك يا ارحم الراحمين"', 'Explicit: "قال قلت للرضا ان قوما من مواليك سالوني في ان تدعو الله لهم فقال والله اني لاعرض اعمالهم على الله في كل يوم"', 'Incipit: "باب في العلم ان طلبه فريضة على الناس محمد بن الحسن المعروف بمموله عن ابراهيم بن هاشم عن الحسن بن محبوب يزيد بن علي بن الحسين عن ابيه عن ابي عبد الله عليه السلام قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه واله طلبه العلم فريضة على كل مسلم الا وان الله يحب بغاة العلم"', 'Title from final colophon on fol.210a.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Collection of Traditions on the characteristics of the Ithná ʻasharī Shīʻī Imams by Abū Jaʻfar Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥasan al-Ṣaffār (d.902 or 3), divided into four ajzāʼ (juzʼ 1 through juzʼ 4) with a colophon following each.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 857', 'Origin: As appears at close on p.165, dated 1140 [1727 or 8].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with notes in hand of Eleazar Birnbaum, "Author ? | Title ? | [Title on flyleaf in a different hand KIṢṢA-I EBŪʼL MIHCAN VE SĀʼIR MUʻJIZĀT. "The Story of Abū al-Mihjan and other marvels" | The events of the early years of Islam in Ottoman Turkish. folk poetry. couplets, style possibly 15-16th cent. | Date [of copy] 1140 AH (1727-1728 A.D. | E Birnbaum June 1964" -- b. Slip with description (in hand of E. Husselman ?) "Ḳissah i Abū al-Mahjan. Turkish A.H. 1140 (= A.D. 1727) | So Nuttall\'s list | Nothing found about this anywhere."', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 6', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather with dark red-brown leather now over spine (repair) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in yellow-tinted paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition) ; spine gold-stamped "K¨ISSA ¨I EBU L-MIHDJEN | MS. 1140" ; head edge of text block gilt ; now sewn in white thread over four recessed cords ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion, staining, etc. ; repairs to spine (rebacked) and flap in dark red-brown and dark brown leathers.', 'Support: European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-28 mm. apart (horizontal) and three crescents watermark (roughly 95 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.12, 16, etc.), quite dense and sturdy, cream in color, well-burnished.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, spacious hand ; mainly serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, rounded with curvilinear descenders, some elongation of horizontal strokes, open and closed counters, pointing (for two and three dots) mainly in conjoined dots ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page, with written area divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iii, 6 V(60), 2 IV(76), iii ; quinions followed by two quaternions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink (now fading), Western numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and mistakenly skips ahead 8 pages following p.90 with p.99).', 'Explicit: "بوفاني دنياده يارى وفادار بولم ديرسك سكا يار اول سكا يار سنه ١١٤٠"', 'Incipit: "بو بنده چاره اولورسه ايدر اول موسى بويله ددى طوتدم كنه يول ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.7).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of a poetic rendering of uncertain authorship relating the tale of Abū Miḥjan ʻAbd Allāh ibn Ḥabīb, Arab poet of the Thāqif tribe who converted to Islam in 631-2 and fought at al-Qādisīyah. Eleazar Birnbaum (who examined the manuscript in June, 1964) has characterized the form as folk poetry couplets, style possibly 15-16th cent.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 475', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.293, transcription completed 25 Shaʻbān 984 [ca. 17 November 1576]. Opening section (through p.38) supplied on replacement leaves may be of 16th or 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 274" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in now dull yellow laid paper with dark brown leather over spine and edges/turn-ins (framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in pink laid paper ; sewn in very dark brown or black thread, two stations ; worked endbands in dark brown or black and cream or dull pink thread, fair condition with some losses, core exposed ; overall in somewhat poor condition with significant abrasion and staining, some lifting and losses of leather and paper, delamination of boards, etc. ; ill-fitting (small).', 'Support: European laid paper mainly with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), and crossbow watermark (see p.128, 133, 208, 213, etc.), sturdy and well-burnished ; opening added / replacement section on yellow-tinted laid paper (with "GFA" and lion in scrollwork watermark) and untinted wove paper ; staining.', 'Decoration: Keywords, headings and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; from p.39 to close, written area (and tabular compartments within) outlined in red rule-border.', 'Script: Naskh ; two main clear Turkish hands ; opening through p.38 (added / replacement section) in an elegant Ottoman naskh, partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on ascenders other than alif, effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders ; from p.39 to close, mainly serifless with effect of tilt to the left, varying in elongation of horizontal strokes, sweeping descenders, etc.', 'Layout: Written area divided to tabular form, a four by six grid of 24 compartments with roughly 3 or4 lines of text in each compartment.', 'Collation: V (10), II (14), II+1 (19), 3 V(49), III (55), II+1 (60), 2 V(80), II (84), 2 III (96), II (100), 4 V(140), IV (148), i ; chiefly quinions ; final leaves ruled but left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes back flyleaf).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "وكان الفراغ من تحرير هذا الكتاب يوم الجمعة قبل العصر خمسة وعشرين من شهر شعبان المعظم سنة اربع وثمانين وتسعمائة اللهم ارحم مؤلفه وكاتبه وقارئه وصاحبه ومن نظر فيه ودعا لهم وجميع المؤمنين والمؤمنات امين يا قاضي الحاجات بحرمة محمد عليه السلام والصلوة والحمد لله رب العاليم"', 'Explicit: "سورة الناس بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم قل اعوذ برب الناس ملك الناس اله الناس امال الناس المجرور كلا والباقون بالفتح تم تمت بعون الله وحسن توفيقه وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله واصحابه اجمعين"', 'Incipit: "ملك بالقصر الرحمن الرحيم ملك وميم الرحيم اظهر مع القصر بعده امينا دليلا كافيا فائضا ..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine (though apprently acephalous) copy of a work pertaining to Qurʼānic readings (qirāʼāt) consisting of analysis of the verses in tabular form, attributed to Abū ʻAmr ʻUthmān ibn Saʻīd al-Dānī (d.1053).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 591', 'Origin: As appears in scribal colophon on p.538, transcription of added replacement section (p.357 to close) completed 1222 [1807 or 8]. As appears in preceding authorial colophon (also on p.538), composition completed 1 Muḥarram 1008 [ca. 24 July 1599]. Paper, hand, etc. suggest that bulk of codex (opening to p.356) copied in the late 17th or early 18th century. Ownership / purchase statement provides a terminus ante quem of 1723.', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisition slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inscription on acquisitions slip, "IL 8" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Cover entirely lost ; now resewn in blue thread, two stations (when later replacements added) ; leather core of tailband remains ; overall in poor condition with covers lost, tears, abrasion, staining and moisture damage to textblock, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of at least three types ; mainly with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 26-28 mm. apart (vertical), crown-star-crescent watermark (60 mm. tall, see p. 32, 50, etc.) and three crescents watermark (perpendicular to chains, 72 mm. long, see p.148, 150, etc.) ; opening bifolium carrying table of contents with 6 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 27-29 mm. apart (vertical), and crown-star-crescent watermark (75 mm. tall) ; replacements from p.357 to close on European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 30 mm. apart (vertical), letters arranged in a triangle "G G M" [?] , heavy and sturdy, scarcely burnished if at all ; quite soiled and stained.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas and red discs.', "Script: Naskh ; two main Turkish / 'Syrian' hands ; opening hand (mainly through p.356) initially quite small and compact, later (with change in layout to fewer lines per page) larger and more generously spaced, partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on mainly lām and occasional free-standing alif, marked effect of tilt to the left, some elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots and strokes looking like reversed hamzah (occasionally for three dots) and inverted caret (mainly on qāf), mix of open and closed counters, lām alif wrapping to almost form a closed loop ; second main hand (from p.357 to close) showing influence of ruqʻah, rounded and compact, virtually serifless with only slight tilt to the left, pointing more in strokes, curvilinear descenders, many open counters, final nūn quite round with dot often set deep in the bowl.", 'Layout: Written in 23-33 lines per page.', 'Collation: I (2), V-4+I (10), 6 V(70), V-1+3 (82), 4 V(122), V-1 (131), V-3 (138), 13 V(268), 1 (269) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes added leaves).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," rectangular, reads "قال المؤلف ايضا كمله مؤلفه ولفقه مصنفه مع تزول البال وتمزع الحال وعامله بما يرتضيه فضلا وجمالا ... بما يفيضه عدلا وجمالا [جلالا] في صبحية نهار السبت مستهل محرم الحرام سنة ثمان بعد الالف من الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلاة واكمل التحية" ; "Scribal," triangular, reads "وكان الفراغ من نسخ هذا الكتاب المستطاب نهار الخميس المبارك ثاني عشري سنة اثنتان وعشرون ومائتان [كذا] والف كمل وختم بالخير المبارك امين"', 'Explicit: "حزى الله خير من تأمل تأليفي وقابل بالاغضاء نحوي وتصريفي فما لي شيء غير اني اختصرته ونقل كلام الناس من غير تعسيف"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله عند تصاريف العبر وعند استماع التواريخ والسير ... بعد فلما كان في التواريخ والسير عبرة لمن اعتبر وتنبها لمن افتكر ... رأيت ان اجمع عن نقلة الاخبار وجملة الآثار تلخيص سير الاولين من الانبياء والمرسلين ... واخبرا الامم الماضية والقرون الخالية وما فيه من العجائب وما اودع الله فيها من الغرائب وسميته اخبار الدول و الاثار [اثار] الاول ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.5) and opening on p.6.", 'Ms. composite codex.', 'Fine composite copy of the historical work by Aḥmad ibn Yūsuf al-Dimashqī al-Qaramānī (Ahmet Çelebi) based mainly on the Taʼrīkh of al-Jannābī (d.1590). Table of contents on added bifolium at opening of codex.'])

en: (count: ['Title page (p. [9]) illuminated; text rubricated; marginal corrections in hand of copyist; table of contents supplied in later (?) hand; on p. [416], praises to God in another hand.', '... Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad ibn al-shaykh ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-shahīr bi-ibn al-Z[...?].', "Date of composition and copying and copyist's name in colophon: qāla muṣannifuhu Yaḥyá ... faraghtu min jamʻihi fī al-Muḥarram sanat sabaʻ wa-sittīn wa-sittumiʾah [i.e. September-October 1268] ... qūbilat hādhihi al-nuskhah al-mubārakah ʻalá nuskhah qūbilat ʻalá nuskhah lil-muṣannif ... wa-wāfaqa al-farāgh min taʻlīqihā fī fī nahār al-sabt al-sābiʻ wa-al-ʻishrīn min shahr Ramaḍān al-muʻaẓẓam qadaruhu sanat sabʻīn wa-sabaʻ miʾah min al-hijrah [i.e. 5 May 1369] ... ʻalá yad", 'Commentary on selected prophetic traditions.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 25', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper may suggest 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Slip of laid paper (paginated p.9-10) and slip with notes (possibly of bookseller, paginated pp.13-14).', 'Former Shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 79. Al-Alfiyah fi \'l-hadith." ; "١٧٢" on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in laid paper with spine and edges/turn-ins in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; board linings in a yellow paper ; hinges in pink ; repairs in blue cloth ; sewn in blue thread, two stations ; endbands mostly gone ; in poor condition with much moisture damage, staining, abrasion, lifting and loss of leather (spine lining exposed), delaminating of boards, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 30 mm. apart (horizontal) ; watermarkof three crescents overlaid, each in a different orientation.', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with headings, etc. in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; neat Turkish hand ; virtually serifless ; mainly closed counters ; slight effect of words descending to baseline as well as gentle slant to the right ; almost fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page, divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 3 V (30), III+1 (37) ; chiefly quinions ; four leaves of final quire left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between p.53-54 and includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت بعون الله وبمنه وحسن توفيقه وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم"', 'Explicit: "فربنا المحمود والمشكور اليه منا ترجع الامور وافضل الصلاة والسلام على النبي سيد الاناب"', 'Incipit: "يقول راجي ربه المقتدر عبد الرحيم بن الحسين الاثري من بعد حمد الله ذي الالاء على امتنان جل عن احصاء ثم صلاة وسلام دائم على نبي الخير ذي المرحم فهذه المقاصد المهمة توضح من علم الحديث رسمه نظمتها تبصرة للمبتدي تذكرة للمنتهي والمسند..."', "Title from 'title page' fol.1a (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Versification in alif of a collection of ḥadīth by Ibn al-Salāḥ al-Shahrazūrī (d. 643/1243).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 224', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; dated statement on front flyleaf suggest a terminus ante quem of 1537 ; paper and hand certainly suggest late 15th or early 16th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "323 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf (p.2) ; "224" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf (p.1) and \'title page\' (p.15).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in dark red leather ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal decoration, compare Déroche class. NSd 7) and pendants with gold-painted accents and gold-tooled border ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and pink, damaged with losses to head and tail ; overall in fairly good condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, fore edge flap too narrow, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical or horizontal, varies) and faint chain lines occasionally visible, often grouped in twos or threes (see p.22, 24, etc.) ; transluscent, thin and crisp, heavily sized and burnished, medium cream in color ; flyleaves in European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Exquisite, superbly executed illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.16, consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying the basmalah in white riqāʻ surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) ; both pieces decorated with swirling vegetal designs with floral accents in gold, white, pink, green, and orange on fields of gold and lapis lazuli ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by frame consisting of gold band flanked by black fillets ; keywords, section headings and abbreviation symbols (mainly two teeth stroke above keywords) rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, compact hand ; serifless with slight effect of inclination to the left, pointing mainly in distinct dots, curvilinear descenders, partially vocalized ; opening table of contents in a fine, seriffed riqāʻ then nastaʻlīq (talik).', 'Layout: Written in 31 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, III (6), IV+1 (15), V (25), 1+IV (34), 8 V(114), III (120), 3 V(150), IV+1 (159), V (169), IV+1 (178), 5 V(228), II (232), 5 V(282), IV (290), i ; chiefly quinions ; leaves between sections left blank or partially blank ; several lacunae marked "بياض بالاصل" (see p.149, 482, 485, etc.) ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Explicit: "هذا بسرا والثانية اطيب منه عنبا لا تضحت المسئلة وانكشفت معناها والله اعلم مسئلة سئلت عن اعراب تركيب وقع في بعض كتب الحنفية ... لانه عمل قبل وجود الشرظ وذلك باطل اجماع والله سبحانه وتعالى اعلم بالصواب"', 'Incipit: "سبحان الله المنزه عن الاشباه والنظائر والحمد لله المتفضل بغفران الكبائر والصغائر ... اما بعد فان فنون العربية على اختلاف انواعها هى اول فنوني ومبتدا الاخبار التي كان في احاديثها سمري وشجوني ... ومام سودت من ذلك كتاب ظريف ... ضمنته القواعد النحوية ذوات الاشباه والنظائر ... والفت كتاب الاشباه والنظائر مرتبا على اسلوب اخر يعرف من مراجعته وهذا الكتاب الذي شرعنا في تجديده في العربية يشبه كتاب القاضي تاج الدين الذي في الفقه ..."', 'Title from colophon for first half (p.284).', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of one of al-Suyūṭī's works on the Arabic language, following the method of the religious sciences (fiqh), with both parts (halves) of the text here appearing in a single volume. Preceded by detailed table of contents (pp.4-13) and followed by several other short texts (see pp.12-13 for listing)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 84', 'Origin: As appears in marginal correction at close on p.393, composition completed 27 Jumādá II 969 [ca. 4 March 1562]. Details of transcription not provided. Paper, hand, decoration, etc. would suggest 17th or possibly late 16th century.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 30. Al-Ashbah wa \'l-nazair."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather; once Type II binding (with flap, impression and soiling on front flyleaf) though only upper cover and spine (repaired with subtle dark red patches at head and tail) remain; doublures in dark, red-brown leather, doublure hinges in dark brown leather; upper cover carries large blind-stamped mandorla (NSd 7 Déroche class.) with pendants to which gold paint was later applied and tooled border; sewn in rose colored thread, two stations; worked chevron endbands in spring / mint green and pink, fairly good condition; overall in somewhat poor condition with lower cover and flap lost, tears and staining to back flyleaf, lifting and losses of spine leather; subtle repairs to board edges and spine in dark red leathers; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with fairly distinct laid lines (some sagging) spaced roughly 6-7 laid lines per cm. and irregular chain lines sporadically visible, some inclusions, fairly crisp and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished ; added front flyleaves of European paper with watermark "IL GRAN MASSO."', "Decoration: Beautifully illuminated titlepiece on 'title page' (p.1) executed in gold, blue, white, greed, red, pink, etc. with cartouche carrying title and medallion (shamsah) carrying an authorship statement; gold rule borders; red dots serving as textual dividers; headings and keywords rubricated.", 'Script: Naskh; small, neat Egyptian or Turkish hand in a medium to bold line; serifless with slight effect of inclination to the left, pointing mainly in distinct dots, though strokes also used for three dots, kāf mashqūqah preferred, point of final and free-standing nūn either nearly assimilated with stroke of narrow bowl or set down within wide bowl; mainly vocalized; passage following text and genealogical diagram in a different hand.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page; impression of ruling board evident.', 'Collation: iii, IV+1 (9), 18 V (189), IV+1 (198), i ; chiefly quinions; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals skipping initial leaf; catchwords present; pagination added later in pencil, Western numerals.', 'Colophon: "Authorial," rectangular, reads: "قال المؤلف رحمه الله وهذا اخر ما اوردناه من كتاب الاشباه والنظائر في الفقه على مذهب الامام الاعظم ابي حنيفة النعمان رضي الله عنه وارضا الجامع للفنون السبعة التي وعدنا في خطبة الفريد في نوعه بحيث لم اطلع له على نظير في كتب اصحابنا رحمه الله وكان مدة تأليفه ستة اشهر وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم تسليما كثيرا" a marginal correction in a different hand adds: "و كان الفراغ من تأليفه في السابع والعشرين من جمادى الاخرة لسنة تسع وستين وتسعمائة صح"', 'Explicit: "على رأس شجرتين فتقطع نصفين رحمة الله عليهم اجمعين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله على ما انعم وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم وبعد فان الفقه أشرف العلوم قدرا واعظمها اجرا"', 'Title from cartouche on fol.1a.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Ibn Nujaym's treatise on Ḥanafī law with many marginal notes. At the close of the codex in a different hand appears an anecdote in Persian regarding the long-lived al-Shaykh Rukn al-Dīn al-Muʻammar al-Ṣaḥābī and genealogical diagram reaching through him back to the Prophet."])

en: (count: ['vol. has edge titles.', 'Text rubricated in red, blue, and gold; phrase endings marked with gold dots; text enclosed by thin borders in gold and black; on pp. [1-2], polychrome rosettes for title page and invocation against Kabīkaj (bookworm demon); on pp. [3-12], table of contents supplied, with gold rules and chapter headings in black, red, blue, and green; three gold dots on p. [13]; on p. [15], illuminated ʻunwān; marginal finding aids and corrections in hand of copyist; foliation begins on p. [24] in hand of copyist;', 'fī shuhūr sanat sitt wa-thamānīn wa-alf ... ʻalá yad ... ʻAbd Allāh ibn Ibrāhīm al-Anābawī al-qāḍī bi-Istafah sābiqan.', "Date of composition and copying and copyist's name in colophon: wa-kāna al-farāgh fī taʾlīfihi fī al-sābiʻ wa-al-ʻishrīn fī Jumāzī al-akhirah sanat tisaʻ wa-sittīn wa-tusʻumiʾah wa-kānat muddat taʾlīfihi sittat ashhur maʻ takhallul ayyām tawaʻʻuk al-jasad wa-al-ḥamd lil-lāh ʻalá al-tamām ... wa-katabahu muʾallifuhu bi-yadihi al-fāniyah Zayn ibn Nujaym al-Ḥanafī ... wa-wāfaqa al-farāgh min kitābatihā fī yawm al-Jumʻah al-mubārak ithnay wa-al-ʻishrīn min shahr Rajab al-murajjib", 'Treatise on the structure of positive law.', '"Treatise on Ḥanafī law." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Text and title rubricated, with red borders; in margin on p. [2], fī al-ṣūratayn lā yazīdu wa-hādhā khāṣṣ bi-hādhihi al-nuskhah lā bi-ghayrihā.', "End date found in owner's mark on p. [1].", '"A faṣl on the use of the solar tables" in Ibn al-Majdī\'s Kitāb al-durr al-yatīm fī tashīl al-taqwīm "for compiling annual ephemerides of the sun." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 72.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 138', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.319, copied by Ismāʻīl ibn Ḥasan ibn Muṣṭafá. Transcription finished 17 Rabīʻ II [year severly obscured with ink smudged and lifted, but may read 1125? = ca. 13 May 1713]. Paper suggests 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Scrap with notes inserted (paginated pp.226-227).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 138. Kitab al-dau, with glosses."', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in laid paper (trimmed to reveal leather onlay of central stamped panel) with dark red leather over spine, fore edge flap and edges / turn-ins (paper faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in magenta laid paper ; upper and lower covers bear central blind-stamped panel (lozenge-shaped) filled with vegetal decoration (compare Déroche class. OSd) and surrounded by tooled star or rosette accents ; sewn in light pink thread, two stations ; worked endbands in red and light blue, fully intact and in fair condition ; overall in fair to poor condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, minor spine slant (slightly cocked), etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 13 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal) ; watermarks include coat of arms with lions flanking cross above circles ; well-sized and burnished ; some staining, smudging and water damage (particularly pp.61-66).', 'Decoration: Headings, keywords, abbreviation symbols and some marginalia rubricated ; textual divders in the form of three inverted commas ; written area surrounded by red rule-border (through p.217).', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq and naskh ; at least two hands ; elegant naskh-nastaʻlīq, virtually serifless, with mainly closed counters, effect of tilt to the right and of words descending to baseline, and elongation of horizontal strokes ; at p.98 hand changes to naskh, also serifless, neat and compact, fairly rounded, with mainly closed counters and slight effect of tilt to the left ; bowl of final nūn often forms a closed circle around the point.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 16 V (160), i ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes back flyleaf and inserts ; skips two pages between pp.3-4 and pp.23-24 and omits p.58).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "تمت هذا الكتاب بفضل الله في يوم سبعة عشر في شهر ربيع الاخر المبارك تاريخ سنة [۱۱۲٥؟] كتب على يد عبد الضعيف محتاج الى رحمة الله تعالى اسماعيل بن حسن بن مصطفى رحمة الله على اجداد [كذا] ولوالديه ولاستاذه ولشركائه ولجميع المؤمنين والمؤمنات وبالله التوفيق وهو نعم الرفيق تمت"', 'Explicit: "هذا باب الاطناب فيه مجال لكنه يقضي الى الملك فاقتصرت على هذا القدر فليس الرأي عن التشاق [؟] تم ضوء والله اعلم بالصواب"', 'Incipit: "ان احق ما يتوشح بذكره صدور الكتاب والدفاتر ... حمد الله تعالى على زواهر اياديه ... اما بعد فان نوع الادب على كثرة شجونه ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of al-Isfarāyīnī's (d.1285) commentary on al-Misbāḥ fī al-naḥw, a treatise on grammar by al-Muṭarrizī (d.1213)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 673', 'Origin: As appears at close on p.523, dated Rabīʻ II 1153 [June-July 1741] "في ربيع الاخر سنه ١١٥٤".', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label, "IL 35" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in now silvery laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OSd 8), pendants and corner pieces along with tooled accents (strokes and rosette stamp) and border (rules flanking a series of s-shaped stamps) ; sewn in red and yellow (from around p.144) thread, four stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and yellow, only headband remains ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, lifting and losses of leather (particularly at board edges), delamination of boards, etc. ; repairs to spine, fore edge flap and board edges in black leather, also damaged.', 'Support: European laid paper with 12-13 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 20 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of crown above cartouche with name and grapes (raisin) below (see p.16, 54, 246, etc.), sturdy and dense, beige in color, well-burnished ; some staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.16, consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral accents in gold and red on a blue ground surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) filled with somewhat crudely executed floral vegetal decoration in gold, white, yellow and red on fields of blue and gold with red accents ; entire piece set into a well consisting of a series of colored bands (in red, gold, yellow, and white) with crosses repeated in black ; written area of incipit page surrounded by a gold frame, elswhere central written area and margins surrounded by a red rule-border ; keywords and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas, discs, etc. ; some overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; two elegant Ottoman hands ; opening hand (through p.334) partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on occasional lām or other ascender, marked effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes or conjoined dots rather than distinct dots, some free assimilation of letters (dots) ; from p.335 to close (as well as table of contents, pp.4-14), another elegant naskh, seriffed with left-sloping wedge or barb head-serifs on most ascenders (vertical stroke of final kāf and even shaqq of medial or initial kāf also seriffed), effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, dramatic contrast of thickness between horizontal and vertical strokes, pointing (for two and three dots) in heavy strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 31 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: III (6), 21 V(216), 2 IV(232), 3 V(262), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and added leaves, mistakenly skips two pages between pp.423-424).', 'Explicit: "اخره تفويض ايتمك استدكده زيد مجرد زراعت ايتدكلريمك حقوقلرينى ارا ايتمكله زراعت ايتمدكلرينك تفويضندن عمروى منعه قادر اولورنى الجواب اولماز"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي احكم احكام الشرع على احسن الترتيب والنظام وجعل علماء الشريعة خلفاء رسوله في بيان الحلال والحرام ... وبعد فيقول الفقير الى رحمة ربه الغني محمد فقهى العينى لله در علامة زماننا ... مظهر الاحكام الربانية مفتي السلطنة العثمانية مولانا ابو الفضل عبد الله افندى اليكيشهرى فقد بذل جهده في الافتاء لذوي الحاجات ... واني لما استسعدت بخدمته [؟] العليا ... اردت ان ارتب هذا الكتاب المستطاب ليسهل الاطلاع على تفاريق الواقعات ... واثبت في الهامش نقل كل مسئلة ... فلما صار ذلك كتابا مرتبا ... سميته ببهجة الفتاوى ..."', 'Title from opening matter (preface) on p.17.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the collection of legal decisions by Yenişehirli Abullah Efendi (d. 1742 or 3), compiled (with an Arabic preface) and annotated in Arabic by Muḥammad Fiqhī al-ʻAynī (fl. 1702). Table of contents provided at opening (pp.4-14).'])

en: (count: ['Spell to alleviate illness written on p. [1]: Yā rabb in kāna tamrīḍī yuqirrunī/zulfá ilayk fa-bāb al-faḍl awsaʻ lī/aw kāna min ajli takfiyat al-adhnāb fa-mā/yuḥtāju ʻafwak lil-aqsām wa-al-ʻilal/hādhihi al-abyāt idhā talāhā al-marīḍ yushfá.', 'Two pages of text followed by 128 pp. of tables; colored decoration on p. [1].', 'Date based on presence of calendrical tables for Islamic years 902-931 [1496-1524].', '"Planetary tables for the longitude of Damascus, with an introduction in unnumbered bābs." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 78.', '"Brief astronomical tables after Ulūgh Beg." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 950', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon though dated ownership statement on 'title page' (p.1) provides a rough terminus ante quem of 1775 and number of prior owners, paper, hand, etc. would suggest early to mid-18th or even late 17th century.", 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 99', "Binding: Pasteboards covered in paper printed with shell 'marbled' design in blue, dark blue, red, and yellow with red leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted wove paper ; resewn in white thread, two stations ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, etc. ; fully detached from textblock.", 'Support: European laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 23-24 mm. apart (vertical), and crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.24, 36, etc.) ; well-burnished to glossy, cream in color, fairly thick and sturdy.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke overlining keywords) rubricated ; diagrams.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, spacious Egyptian hand in a medium line ; mainly serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in distinct dots but three dots represented by curved stroke, occasional vocalization, alif maqṣūrah often pointed as yāʼ.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 17 lines per page, written area occasionally divided to columns ; frame-ruled.', "Collation: i, 2 V(20), VII (34), V (44), VI+3 (59), i ; 'quire numbering' in the form of whole words appears on the recto of every tenth leaf (as though quinions, but does not correspond to current sewing/gatherings) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "واما العتابا فان الالف واللام تعاقب التنوين فكان التنوين موجود فيه"', 'Incipit: [al-Bāb fī ʻilm al-ʻarūḍ ] "قال الشيخ الامام ابو محمد سعيد بن المبارك النحوي رحمه الله الشعر لفظ موزون مقفا [مقفى] يدل على معنى واشتقاقه من شعرت بالشيء اذا علمت به ..." ; [Jumlah mukhtaṣarah fī ʻilm al-qawāfī] "هذه جملة مختصرة في علم القوافي تليق بهذا المختصر من العروض يتضمن زيد علمها مع كثير من التعديل وكثير الاتسشهادات ..." ; [al-Fuṣūl fī al-qawāfī] "اعلم ان الشعر تتعاقب عليه اشيا فمنها ما هو ملازم ومنها ما هو مفارق ..."', "Title from rubricated 'title page' inscription (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.79-p.118 : al-Fuṣūl fī al-qawāfī / Abū Muḥammad Saʻīd ibn al-Mubārak Ibn al-Dahhān al-Naḥwī.', '3. p.77-p.79 : [poetic excerpts by the author] / Abū Muḥammad Saʻīd ibn al-Mubārak Ibn al-Dahhān al-Naḥwī.', '2. p.63-p.77 : Jumlah mukhtaṣarah fī ʻilm al-qawāfī / Abū Muḥammad Saʻīd ibn al-Mubārak Ibn al-Dahhān al-Naḥwī.', '1. p.1-p.62 : al-Bāb fī ʻilm al-ʻarūḍ / Abū Muḥammad Saʻīd ibn al-Mubārak Ibn al-Dahhān al-Naḥwī', 'Fine copy of a selection of concise works by Abū Muḥammad Saʻīd ibn al-Mubārak Ibn al-Dahhān al-Naḥwī (d.1174) on versification, metre and rhyme. Final work ends abruptly.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 935', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974). Copied just after Isl. Ms. 934 according to close of that manuscript (p.91, Isl. Ms. 934).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 84', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "مقالة | لافلاطون | J.H.D." ; sewn in heavy white thread, seemingly over three cords (difficult to examine) ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; compact hand in a medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with slight effect of tilt to the right and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 3 V(30), II (34), i (as suggested by gatherings, sewing difficult to examine) ; chiefly quinions ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals accompanied by letter kāf (ك) appearing on the opening recto of each gathering from the second (see pp.21, 41, 61) ; opening leaf misplaced and bound between pages ٨ and ٩ ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "والمحالات التي تلزم من جهل تلك المعاني اللطيفة التي اذا كانت من عند غير الله وجد فيها اختلاف كثير فهذا مبلغ ما يجب ان نتكلم فيه من هذه المسائل الثلاث من يجاوزه يجواز الشرط الذي التزمناه من الايجاز والدوالة فيما يحتاج الى بسط وشرح الى اماكنه من كتاب الفوز الاكبر الذي نستأنف بعون الله عمله وبالله التوفيق وله الحمد كما يستحق بجميع نعمه على جميع خلقه وصلواته على النبي الهادي من الضلال والمجير من المكاره والاجوال محمد سيد النبيين واكرم المبعوثين امين امين امين"', 'Incipit: "قال افلاطون من المتس امرا لا بد له من الوصول اليه صبر على الطريق وما يلحقه فيه من صعوبة ومشقة ... كتاب الفوز الاصغر للشيخ الامام الحكيم ابي علي المعروف بابن مسكويه ... بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام على أشرف المرسلين سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين هذا كتاب الفوز الاصغر في الحكمة ويحتوي عدة مسائل المسألة الاولى في اثباث الصانع وتشتمل على عشرة فصول ..."', 'Title from heading on original opening leaf, now misplaced (p.7).', 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy (seemingly acephalous, but with opening leaf simply misplaced and now bound between pages ٨ and ٩, and somewhat abridged by the copyist) of Abū ʻAlī Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad Miskawayh's (d. 1030) al-Fawz al-aṣghar, in which he very concisely addresses three metaphysical questions: the exisitence of God, the soul and its states and the prophets. Identification first supplied by Tzvi Langermann."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 554', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.63, transcription of first work (with second word to follow) completed 27 Muḥarram 955 [ca. 8 March 1548].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip (on recycled card) in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- c. Scrap with notes, etc. (see pp.65-66).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 258a2" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (in dark blue, green, white, etc.) with dark red leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted European laid paper ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in lavender and yellow, in fairly good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of paper, minor delamination of boards at corners, staining, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly straight and distinct), chain lines grouped in threes with 11-15 mm. between chains and 26-34 mm. between groups (vertical) ; fairly thin and transluscent, lightly sized and burnished, many inclusions ; staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Section headings, keywords and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs, inverted commas, hāʼ, etc.', "Script: Naskh ; large, clear 'Syrian' hand in a medium to bold line ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, many closed counters, pointing mainly in distinct dots, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf) with hooked serif on shaqq.", 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 6 V(60), I+1 (63), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes scrap with notes and some flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "نجز كتاب الغصب للامام العالم العلامة احمد بن محمد بن سليمان العلامي الحنفي رحمه الله تعالى ويليه كتاب الجناية للمؤلف ايضا بتاريخ يوم الخميس سابع عشري شهر الله المحرم الحرام سنة خمس وخمسين وتسعمائة احسن الله تعالى عاقبها امين"', 'Incipit: [Kitāb al-ghaṣb] "كتاب الغصب وهو محرم بالاجماع ياثم به ان علم ان ما اخذه لغيره ..." ; [Kitāb al-jināyah] "كتاب الجناية وفيه فصول الاول فيما يضمن بارسال الدابة وادخالها وربطها ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from 'title pages' on p.3 and p.67.", 'Ms. codex.', '3. p. 67-p.125 : Kitāb al-jināyah / Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Sulaymān al-ʻAllāmī al-Ḥanafī.', '2. p.64 : [blank].', '1. p.3-p.63 : Kitāb al-ghaṣb / Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Sulaymān al-ʻAllāmī al-Ḥanafī.', 'Clear copy of two legal works, the first on illegal appropriation or use of rights of another (ghaṣb) and the second on crime (jināyah) by Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Sulaymān al-ʻAllāmī al-Ḥanafī.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 92', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.490, copied for himself by ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad al-Sibāʻī al-Ḥimsī. Transcription finished ("wa-qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min kitābatih...") 2 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1082 [ca. 31 March 1672].', 'Accompanying materials: Several slips carrying notes (paginated pp.79-80, pp.101-102, pp.113-114, pp.269-270, pp.393-394).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 60. Al-Hawi al-kudsi."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in deep red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in dark blue/indigo laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry large blind-stamped mandorla (with floral vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OAi 10) and frame of tooled fillets ; envelope flap carries blind-stamped rosette ; sewn in mainly red thread, though a few quires in yellow, two stations ; endbands virtually gone with only traces of primaries remaining ; in poor condition with lower cover detaching, significant abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, etc. ; ill-fitting (small).', 'Support: European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 30-32 mm. apart, and crown-star-crescent watermark (compare Heawood 1132) ; burnished but not very smooth.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and many notabilia (side-heads) rubricated ; overlining and textual divders in the form of inverted commas in red ; textual dividers in the form of three inverted commas in black ; written area surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Syrian hand ; mainly sans serif though small head-serifs occasionally appear ; slight effect of tilt to the left ; pointing in distinct dots ; extended in the horizontal with some swooping descenders.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', "Collation: I (2), VI (14), 22 V(234), IV (242) ; chiefly quinions ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, located just above the written area on the recto of each leaf from the 'title page' (p.7) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).", 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "علقه لنفسه ولمن شاء الله من بعده كاتبه الفقير الداعي علي ابن المرحوم الشيخ محمد السباعي الحنفي الحمصي بلدا الحنفي مذهبا القادري طريقة ... قد وقع الفراغ من كتابته صبيحة نهار الخميس وهو اليوم الثاني من عشر ذي الحجة الحرام الذي هو ختام سنة اثنى وثمانين والف من الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلوة والسلام"', 'Explicit: "وهذا اساس قياس جليل يفتح الله بمعرفته ابواب النجاة ويرقي بمراقيه معالي الدرجات والله تبارك وتعالى اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب ... انقضى تحرير الحاوي القدسي ونجز وابى محرره التطويل فاوجز وقد حوي بحمد الله ومنه مسائل مجموعات كثيرة في الاصولين ... الحمد والشكر كما تحب وترضى والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي هدانا لدين الاسلام ودعانا الى دار السلام ... وبعد تيسير ذي العطاء السني القوي تحرير محمد القونوي وسميته الحاوي لكونه الحاوي لمذهب الامام ابي حنيفة رضي الله تعالى عنه من جنس مؤلف الجنسي الجامع بين الاصولين والفروع ... المرتب على ثلاثة اقسام اصول الدين واصول الفقه وفروع الاحكام ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.7).", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the work of Ḥanafī law most commonly attributed to Jamāl al-Dīn Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Nūḥ al-Qābisī al-Ghaznawī. In this manuscript the author's name is given as al-Imām Muḥammad al-Qūnawī (compare the case cited in Ḥājjī Khalīfah of a manuscript naming the author as Muḥammad al-Ghaznawī). See Isl. Ms. 553 for another ms. copy."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 59', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.906, copied by Khalīl ibn Ibrāhīm. Transcription completed ("thumma waqaʻa al-farāgh min taswīd hādhihi al-awrāq...") in Erzurum, 10th Shaʻbān 1132 [ca. 17 June 1720].', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 145. Al-Hidayah."', 'Binding: Cover missing (Type II, with flap) though spine is mostly intact ; majority sewn in yellow thread, two stations, final quires sewn in red thread ; chevron endbands in yellow and red, intact and in fair condition ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types, with three crescents watermark, three circles watermark (crown, crescent, fleur de lis, heart), grapes with crown and initials "I F", etc. ; mainly 9-10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines 26-27 mm. apart (vertical), well-burnished to glossy ; much staining, tears and creasing.', 'Decoration: Section headings rubricated ; text being commented upon overlined in red ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by red rule-border ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, bold Turkish hand ; virtually serifless though occasional head-serifs appear without regularity ; strong effect of tilt to the left ; mainly closed counters ; final nūn often forms shape of numeral khamsah (۵) ; occasional superscripting of final letters in final word of line ; two dots in the form of a curved line ; hand changes in latter quires (around pp.517-813), very similar to main hand though smaller and more compact.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: ii, IV (8), 24 V(248), IV (256), 2 V(276), IV+2 (286), 16 V(446), IV (454) ; chiefly quinions ; appears to lack roughly seven quires between pp.856-857 (catchwords do not match and foliation skips from ۴۲۷ to ٥۰۸) ; leaf with pp.515-516 and final three leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (begins with ۱ on page facing incipit page (p.23), skips ٥, skips from ۱۹۰ to ٢٠٠, skips a leaf between ٢٥٦ and ٢٥٧, etc.) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during digitization, includes front flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "الحمد لله على التمام وعلى رسوله افضل التحية والسلام في بلدة ارضروم على يد خليل بن ابراهيم وعليهما رحمة الرحيم في الدارين ثم وقع الفراغ عن تسويد هذه الاوراق في سنة اثنى وثلثين ومائة بعد الالف من الهجرة النبوية في شهر شعبان المعظم في اليوم العاشر غفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه في الدارين بحرمة سيد الثقلين تم تم تم"', 'Explicit: "هذا لان القليل لا يمكن الاحتراز عنه ولا يستطاع الامتناع عنه فسقط اعتباره دفعا للحرج كقليل النجاسة وقليل الانكشاف بخلاف ما اذا كانا نصفين او كانتا الميتة اغلب لانه لا ضرورة والله اعلم بالصواب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي اعلى معالم العلم وعلامه واظهر شعائر الشرع واحكامه ... وقد جرى على الوعد في مبدأ بداية المبتدي ان اشرحها بتوفيق الله شرحا ارسمه بكفاية المنتهى فشرعت فيه والوعد يسوغ بعض المساغ وحين اكاد اتكئ عنه اتكاء الفراغ تبينت فيه نبذا من الاطناب وخشيت ان يهجر لاجله الكتاب فصرفت عنه العنان والعناية الى شرح اخر موسوم بالهداية ..."', 'Title from inscription accompanying close on p.906.', 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy of Marghīnānī's celebrated commentary on his Bidāyat al-mubtadiʼ, a treatise on Ḥanafī law."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 93', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.201, first work copied by Yūsuf ibn Muḥammad al-Qāṣiḥ al-ʻUdhrī [?]. Transcription finished ("najiza Kitāb al-Isʻāf ... wa-wāfaqa al-farāgh min naskhih...") 16 Dhū al-Qaʻdah 1122 [ca. 6 January 1711]. As appears in colophon on p.320, transcription of second work completed ("wa-kāna al-farāgh min naskh hādhā al-kitāb al-mubārak...") 3 Rabīʻ I 1123 [ca. 21 April 1711], likely by different copyist (unnamed).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 15. Al-Isaf fi ahkam al-aukaf."', "Binding: Pasteboards faced in block-printed paper (pink, lavender, 'gold') with red-brown leather over spine, fore-edge and edges/turn-ins (paper faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in orange laid paper ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked endbands in green and blue, partially lost ; in poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, flap detached at lower cover, etc.", 'Support: European laid paper in two types, distinct type for each work ; first on a European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22 mm. apart, watermark with crown, bar with "C B B" and beaded diamond below, quite similar to Heawood 1055 ; second work in a very smooth, thin, and well-burnished European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-27 mm. apart, coat of arms watermark with cross, crown, "S P" in circle below, very similar to Heawood 727-731, 764, 769, etc. though earlier than these.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; occasional notabilia rubricated ; overlining and textual divders in the form of discs in red ; written area surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Naskh ; two clear Syrian or Egyptian hands [?], one supplying each work ; virtually serifless ; pointing of second hand in distinct dots, less distinct for first hand with line used often for two dots and inverted comma for three dots ; some extension of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: [al-Isʻāf fī aḥkām al-awqāf] Written in 21 lines per page, [Waqf Hilāl wa-al-Khaṣṣāf] in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V+2 (12), 15 V(162) ; entirely quinions with single bifolium added to first quire ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, distinct for each work ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: [al-Isʻāf fī aḥkām al-awqāf] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "نجز كتاب الاسعاف الجامع بين لوقفي هلال والخصاف هذا ووافق الفراغ من نسخه في اليوم المبارك سادس عشر ذي القعدة الحرام سنة ۱۱۲۲ على يد الفقير الى الله تعالى يوسف بن محمد القاصح العذري [؟] غفر الله لو ولواديه والمسلكين اجمعين تم" ; [Waqf Hilāl wa-al-Khaṣṣāf] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "وكان الفراغ من نسخ هذا الكتاب المبارك يوم الاربعاء المبارك الثالث شهر ربيع الاول من شهور سنة ثلاث وعشرين وماية والف من الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلاة والسلام وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم تسليما كثيرا تم"', 'Explicit: [al-Isʻāf fī aḥkām al-awqāf] "وهو كافر بالذي يتقرب اليه بذلك. نسأل الله تعالى الثبات على الدين والموت على الاسلام بجاه محمد عليه افضل الصلاة والسلام وعلى اله واصحابه الائمة العظام البررة الكرام والحمد لله على الختام" ; [Waqf Hilāl wa-al-Khaṣṣāf] "وان كان في المرض لا يجوز ان يصرف الى الابنة ويجوز ان يصرف الى اولادها هذا اخر ما انتهى اليه تصنيف الشيخ رحمه الله الامام الاجل قاضي القضاة ابي محمد عبد الله بن الحسين الناصحي رحمة الله عليه ورضوانه"', 'Incipit: [al-Isʻāf fī aḥkām al-awqāf] "الحمد لله الذي خلق الانسان باحسن تقويم وهدى من شاء منه الى الصراط المستقيم ... وبعد فان العلماء الاولين قد جعلهم الله رحمة الاخرين ... وان كتاب احكام الاوقاف للامام الهمام ابي بكر احمد بن عمرو الخصاف ... لما كان العمدة في هذا الفن من تأليف الاوائل ... اختصرته الى كتاب احتوي على ما فيه من المقاصد وعلى ما في كتاب هلال بن يحيى من الزوائد وضممت اليه كثيرا من المسائل والاصول ... وسميته الاسعاف في احكام الاوقاف ..." ; [Waqf Hilāl wa-al-Khaṣṣāf] "قال الشيخ الامام قاضي القضاة ابو محمد عبد الله بن الحسين الناصحي رحمه الله تعالى لقد هممت باختصار كتاب الوقف لهلال بن يحيى فترددت فيه زمانا لحسن تصنيفه ... ثم استعنت بالله تعالى على اختصار كتابي ابوي بكر هلال ابن يحيى واحمد بن عمر الخصاف البصريين ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from 'title page' inscriptions for the respective works (p.7 and p.209).", 'Ms. composite codex.', '7. fol.161a-162b : [originally left blank, now carries Masāʼil al-istibdāl].', '6. fol.105a-160b : Waqf Hilāl wa-al-Khaṣṣāf / Abū Muḥammad ʻAbd Allāh ibn al-Ḥusayn al-Nāṣiḥī.', '5. fol.103b-104b : [blank].', '4. fol.102b-103a : [originally left blank, now carries table of contents].', '3. fol.101b-102a : [blank].', '2. fol.4a-101a : al-Isʻāf fī aḥkām al-awqāf / Ibrāhīm ibn Mūsá al-Ṭarābulusī.', '1. fol.3a-3b : [table of contents].', 'Two works of Ḥanafī law pertaining to awqāf.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 503', "Origin: As appears in colophon on p.337, final work copied by Ismāʻīl al-Liddī al-Azharī al-Rifāʻī with transcription completed 9 Jumādá II 1160 [?] [ca. 18 June 1747 ?]. Dated reading notice on opening 'title page' provides a rough terminus ante quem for first work of 1727. Paper for opening work would suggest early 18th century. Dated reading notices for one ʻAbd al-Karīm ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān on 'title pages' for both works would suggest that both works had been brought together by 1778 or 9.", 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2) -- b. Three inventory cataloguing slips in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.3-8).', 'Former shelfmark: From spine label, inner front cover and \'title page\' (p.9), "IL 77" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards now covered in dark pink cloth ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings (doublures) and lining of envelope flap in marbled paper (mainly in blue, pink, yellow and white) ; fore edge flap lined in red brown leathers ; sewn in light blue thread, two stations ; overall in fair condition with some staining and lifting of cloth.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; near the opening a type with 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-30 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks including three crescents (80 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.14, 23, etc.) and egg-like figure with six circles within and crown above (see p.18, 19, etc. and compare nos. 378, 381, 387, 392 and 394 dated 1724-1726 in Nikolaev, Watermarks of the Ottoman Empire, vol.1) ; another type with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-29 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark (73 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.34, 43, etc.) ; paper of the latter quires with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark (66 mm. long, perpendicular to the chains) ; minor staining.', 'Decoration: Some keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs and inverted commas.', "Script: Naskh ; at least three hands ; opening of al-Jawāhir al-durar (through p.108) in an elegant Egyptian or 'Syrian' [?] hand, mainly serifless and quite rounded with curvilinear descenders, effect of tilt to the left, freely ligatured, pointing (for two and three dots) mainly distinct dots, point of final nūn set deep in bowl, kāf mashqūqah preferred ; remainder of al-Jawāhir al-durar and paratext from exemplar (p.109-p.301) in possibly two or three hands, similar to first but more compact with pointing in strokes, freely ligatured ; final work in still another hand, somewhat angular with 'Syrian' character, mainly serifless with effect of tilt to the left or right, occasional effect of words descending to baseline, some elongation of horizontal strokes, somewhat carelessly pointed (with two and three dots distinct or conjoined).", 'Layout: Written in 21-23 lines per page.', 'Collation: 16 V(160), III (166) ; almost exclusively quinions ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals in the upper outer corner of the opening recto of each of the first five quires ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: [Kitāb min Allāh sabaqa] "وكان الفراغ من كتابة هذا المولف في يوم الخميس في تاسع من شهر جمادى الثاني المبارك سنه ١٦٠ على يدي افقر الورى ... الفقير اسماعيل اللدي وطنا الازهري نسبة[؟] الرفاعي طريقة عفي الله عنه وعن والديه وعن مشايخه وعن جميع المسلمين امين امين امين"', 'Incipit: [al-Jawāhir wa-al-durar] "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلي واسلم على سيدنا محمد ... وبعد فهذه جواهر درر التقطتها من كلام شيخي وقدوتي الى الله تعالى الشيخ الكامل ... علي الخواص البرنسي [البرلسي] ... وسميته بالجواهر والدرر ..." ; [Kitāb min Allāh sabaqa] "وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم هذا كتاب من الله سبق من قبل ان فتق ورتق ضمنه عهد من صدق وصدق ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from inscriptions on opening 'title page' (p.9).", 'Ms. composite codex.', '6. p.310-p.337 : Kitāb min Allāh sabaqa min qabli an futiqa wa rutiqa [?] / Ibn al-ʻArabī.', "5. p.309 : [originally blank, now 'title page' for final work with title and a few study / reading notices and ownership statement].", '4. p.306-308 : [blank].', '3. p.302-p.305 : [assorted exceprts].', '2. p.297-p.301 : [selection of ijāzāt, etc. transcribed from the manuscript exemplar under the heading "Ṣūrah mā ʻalá aṣlih min khuṭūṭ mashāyikh al-islām bi-Miṣr al-maḥrūsah"].', '1. p.10-p.297 : al-Jawāhir wa-al-durar / ʻAbd al-Wahhāb ibn Aḥmad al-Shaʻrānī.', "Fine copy of the Ṣūfī work expositing a collection of spiritual utterances attributed to al-Shaʻrānī's shaykh, ʻAlī al-Khawwāṣ al-Burullusī (d.1532 or 3). Apparently once in a collection (majmūʻah) that contained the works listed on opening 'title page' (p.9). Now followed by a work attributed to Ibn ʻArabī (d.1240), Kitāb min Allāh sabaqa."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 471', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. suggest mid to late 15th century. Ownership statement on 'title page' (p.1) provides terminus ante quem of 1177 [1763 or 4].", 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, "M. 23" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in lavender paper with tan leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in pale blue paper ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in magenta and cream, good condition ; overall in poor condition with lower cover fully detached, spine detaching, lifting and losses of leather and paper, staining, abrasion, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of two main types ; main type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 37 mm. apart (horizontal), and large bunch of grapes watermark (noose on stem, drop-shaped berries, see p.8, 13, 28, etc.), thin and transluscent though sturdy, dark cream to beige in color, quite well-burnished ; another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27-37 mm. apart (horizontal), and crossed swords watermark (see p.432, 433, etc.), lighter in color, less well-burnished, still fairly transluscent ; some ink burn, staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated.', "Script: Naskh ; an angular Egyptian [?] or 'Syrian' hand in a medium to bold line ; serifless with dramatic effect of tilt to the right, elongation of horizontal strokes, occasional effect of words descending to baseline, mainly rectilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred, some free assimilation of letters.", 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page.', 'Collation: 6 V(60), VI (72), 4 V(112), IV (120), V (130), VI (142), 2 V(162), IV (170), 3 V(200), V+1 (211), V (221) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "ولم يسهلوها او يبدلوها حرف بل كما فعلوا في الذكرين ونحوه [؟] والحمد لله وحده"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله العلي الجليل القادر الواحد الاحد الفرد الصمد القاهر ... احمده على نعمه المتزائدة الغزائر ... وبعد فهذا مختصر اذكر فيه ما قرأت به من رواية الامام عبد الله الدمشقي ابن عامر من روايتي هشام وابن ذكوان عنه بواسطة اصحابهما ..."', "Title from inscription in hand of copyist on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of an extract taken from al-Jāmiʻ al-azhar al-mufīd li-mufradāt al-arbaʻah ʻashr maʻa ṣināʻat al-rasm wa-al-tajwīd, a compilation on Qurʼānic readings (qirāʼāt) by Jaʻfar ibn Ibrāhīm ibn Sulaymān al-Muqrīʼ al-Shāfiʻī al-Sanhūrī al-Azharī (d.1489).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 487', 'Origin: Statement on \'title page\' (p.7) indicates that composition of the work was begun Muḥarram 1208 [August-September 1793] (though the copyist apparently made a mistake in the phrasing of the date with "مائتين" faintly visible following "بعد" and "الالف" written over it). Despite the mistake in this statement, the reading 1208 is confirmed by the opening matter (preface) on p.9 in which the author indicates "..لما دخلنا في سنة الف ومائتين وثمناية من الهجرة النبوية ... اني هممت ان الف كتابا في سنن الدين واحكامه ..." ; according to GAL likely completed in 1212 [1797]. Lacks dated colophon ; however, number of corrections and marginal notes, paper, etc. indicate that the main text may be in the hand of the author, or perhaps collated by him, suggesting a dating in the last decade of the 18th century or prior to his death in 1801 (roughly 1797-1801). Paper of replacement leaves suggests a fairly contemporary dating or slightly further into the 19th century. Ownership statement on opening replacement leaf provides a terminus ante quem of 1825.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 80" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards now covered in aquamarine paper with black cloth over spine and traces of dark red-brown leather at edges/turn-ins (possibly fully covering boards under paper) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; upper and lower covers bear traces of tooled rule-borders ; board linings in yellow laid paper ; sewn in light pink thread, two stations ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, minor delamination of boards, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of at least two types ; mainly with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart (vertical), horse with main and tail flying watermark (see p.115, etc. and compare Cheval no.1, p.20 and 335 in Velkov, Les Filigranes dans les documents Ottomans), and "A G C" countermark (see p.114) ; replacement leaves with 10-11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart (vertical), lion passant guardant (see final two leaves and compare watermark dated 1807, no.924 in Nikolaev, Watermarks of the Ottoman Empire) and arms with "O A C" under scrollwork (see p.6, etc. and compare nos.766 dated 1795 and 814, 821, 839 dated 1799 in Nikolaev).', 'Decoration: Keywords and some marginal glosses and corrections rubricated ; overlining in red ; text of written area surrounded by red-rule border.', 'Script: Naskh ; main hand a large, elegant Iraqi [?] hand (certainly with Persianate features) ; virtually serifless (though very slight head-serifs occasionally appear) and fairly vertical with only a slight tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots, point of nūn often set down within bowl, partially vocalized ; replacement leaves at opening and close supplied in another elegant naskh with Persianate features, virtually serifless with effect of tilt to the left, some elongated horizontal strokes, pointing in conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V-3+3 (10), 4 V(50), V-2+2 (60) ; chiefly quinions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of oblique strokes in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Explicit: "وما جعلنا القبلة التي كنت عليها الا لنعلم من يتبع الرسول ممن ينقلب على عقبية تمت اخباراته الغيبية وصدق مقالاته المروية"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي انزل على عبده الكتاب ولم يجعل له عوجا قيما لينذر بأسا شديد [شديدا] من لدنه ... اما بعد يقول العبد الفقير الى الله الغني محمد العمري بن احمد العمي بن علي العمري الموصلي مولدا منشئا الساكن عند باب الجديد لما دخلنا في سنة الف ومائتين وثمانية بعد الاهجرة النبوية ... اني هممت ان الف كتابا في سنن الدين واحكامه ... فجمعت هذا الكتاب وسميته جوهر المنظم من كلام النبي المكرم ...', "Title from inscription on recto of opening replacement leaf (p.5), 'title page' (p.7), and opening matter (preface) on p.9.", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine early (possibly autograph) copy of a collection of sayings of the Prophet compiled from compiled from various collections of ḥadīth by Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad al-ʻUmarī al-Mawṣilī (d.1801). Replacement leaves at opening and close.'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: initials A.R.T. with crown and shield; cursive monogram AG or GA.', 'Text enclosed in thin triple border; borders decorated in Maranao style in black, red, and yellow. Work created in the Philippines.', 'Praises of the Prophet Muhammad in Arabic; nonreligious verses in margins in Maranao.'])

en: (count: ['Gilded ʻunwān and colophon; text rubricated and enclosed in wide gold borders; marginal commentary in red ink in another hand.', 'Date in colophon.', 'Explanations of fifty doctrines of Islam and proofs supporting their veracity.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 588', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.130a, copied by Ṭāhir [Kāmil ?] ibn ʻUthmān. Copying completed ("atmamtuhu bi-ʻawn Allāh...") in the early morning of Saturday, 1st of Dhū al-Qaʻdah 735 [ca. 23 June 1335].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. -- c. two slips of European paper with excerpts and comments (between fol.14-15 and fol.170-171).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and pasted label on spine, "IL 370a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboard covered in dark brown leather; Type III binding (without flap); upper and lower cover carry vestiges of a polylobed central medallion (compare W 80-81) and border designs with gold-tooled dots and blind-tooled lines in a geometric pattern (compare BNF arabe 2898); doublures of striped cloth in blue, brown and white; much repaired, but in poor condition.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper; laid lines running vertically and spaced roughly 8 laid lines per cm; chain lines running horizontally faintly visible grouped in twos or possibly threes; groups spaced roughly 60 mm. apart.', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with section headings in red.', 'Script: Naskh; clear Eastern hand; essentially sans serif, kāf mashkūlah favored over kāf mabsūṭah; fully pointed and rarely vocalized; colophon in sans serif taʻlīq.', 'Layout: Written in two columns of 11 lines.', 'Collation: 2 VI (24), 2 V (44), 8 IV (108), 2 III (120), 5 I (130), 1 (131); catchwords lacking; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (referenced in cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "اتممته بعون الله وحسن توفيقه يوم السبت وقت الضحى في غرة ذي القعدة سنة خمس وثلثين وسبعمائة على يد العبد الضعيف المحتاج الى رحمة الله تعالى وغفرانه طاهر [كامل ؟] بن عثمان غفر الله لمن قرا ودعا لكاتبه بالمغفرة"', 'Explicit: "جنات عدن وقصور ناعمه"', 'Incipit: "بسم الاله رب كل عبد والحمد لله ولي الحمد ثم التحيات بغير عدد على النبي المصطفى محمد وبعد قد قال ابو حفص عمر..."', 'Title from opening on fol.4b.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Versified treatise on the debated points of law. Description provided by Alison Vacca.'])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated; marginal notes in hand of copyist.', 'Date on p. [34]: ithnay ʻashar shahr Jumādī al-awwal sanat 964 arbaʻ wa-sittīn wa-tisʻumiyah [13 March 1557].', 'Text (not this copy) published.', 'Pp. [1-36]. Bound with a list of traditions regarding the relative merit of prayer in the four holiest mosques, pp. [37-40].', '"A treatise on arithmetic." Cataloging by Elinor M Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 482', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.515, transcription completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1116 [ca. 15 April 1705] by Bakīr ibn Muḥammad ibn Ismā‘īl.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- c. Scrap with notes and seal impression between pp.40-41.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, \'title page\' (p.1), and spine label, "IL 350a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in perhaps once-tinted laid paper with edges/turn-ins in red-brown leather and spine covered in paper (manuscript waste) ; Type II binding (with flap, now lost) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers bear visible impression of stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal decoration) ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations, gone from many quires ; worked endbands in blue, damaged with core exposed ; overall in quite poor condition with significant abrasion and staining, upper cover fully detached, probable loss of flap, lifting and losses of paper (particularly at spine), delamination of boards, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper mainly with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 20-21 mm. apart (vertical), and grapes (raisin) under cartouche with "P A" [?] and crown above watermark (see p.1, etc.), quite thin and transluscent though sturdy, burnished ; another sturdier type with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 25-28 mm. apart (vertical), no watermarks visible (see pp.377-416, etc.) ; staining and tidelines.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) and naskh ; at least three hands ; opening hand through p.177 a nastaʻlīq (talik), bold Turkish hand, virtually serifless and quite compact with marked tilt to the right, mainly closed counters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots ; hand supplying by p.177 through p.301 a small and rather compact naskh, partially though irregularly seriffed with effect of tilt to the left, quite rounded with curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, some free assimilation of letters ; hand supplying p.302 to p.446 another nastaʻlīq (talik) similar to the opening hand, also compact with dramatic inclination to the right ; at p.447 reverts back to the naskh and continues in this hand to the close.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 34-35 lines per page.', 'Collation: V-1 (9), 25 V(259) ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly skips two pages between pp.3-4).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تم بعون الله وحسن توفيقه على يدي افقر الورى واحوجهم بكير بن محمد بن اسماعيل تمه في يوم الثاني بعد صلوة الظهر العشرون من شهر ذي الحجة في سلك سنة ستة عشر ومائة والف من الهجرة المصطوية [كذا] عليه افضل التحية واكمل الثنية واسأل الله العفو والعافية ... واحشرنا معهم بلطفك يا رب العالمين"', 'Explicit: "ولانه ثبت فضيلتهم على القرن الثاني بدلائل بكثيرة من الايات والخبار"', 'Incipit: "احمد الله ملأ السموات وملأ الارض وما يشاء بعد هذه الاشياء ... وبعد فقد الح علي زمرة خلاني وثلة خلصاني ان اشرح لهم كتاب المصابيح تصنيف الامام الهمام ... ركن الشريعة محيي السنة ابي محمد الحسين بن مسعود الفراء ... فاجبتهم الى ذلك واوردت في اول الكتاب مقدمة في اصطلاحات اصحاب الحديث وانواع علوم الحديث واوردت فيه كل راو لم يكن مذكورا في متن المصابيح وتركت ذكر من هو مذكور فيه وسميته بكتاب المفاتيح في شرح المصابيح ..."', 'Title from opening matter (preface) on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of a commentary on Maṣābīḥ al-sunnah, the ḥadīth collection compiled from various sources and arranged by subject and degree of authority by al-Ḥusayn ibn Masʻūd al-Farrāʼ al-Baghawī (d.1117?).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 659', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.43, opening work copied by al-Ḥusayn ibn Abī al-Qāsim ( الحسين بن ابي القاسم ) with transcription completed 26 Rajab 1155 [ca. 26 September 1742] (date provided in ghubār numerals). As appears in colophon on p.130, final work copied for himself by Aḥmad ibn ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz ibn Saʻd ibn ʻAlī al-Jazāʼirī al-Mālikī al-Ashʻarī al-Baṣrī (احمد بن عبد العزيز بن سعد بن علي الجزائري المالكي الاشعري البصري ) with transcription completed with seven days left in Shaʻbān 1135 [ca. 29 May 1723] (date provided in ghubār numerals).', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and label on lower cover, "IL 334" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in coated orange paper with black cloth over spine (quarter binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; exposed boards untinted, hinges in blue paper ; sewn in heavy white thread, two stations ; overall in somewhat poor condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of paper, minor delamination of boards, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of two main types ; through p.58, type with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 31-32 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of triple mount with cross above (see p.8, 12, 13, 18, etc.) and initials [?] in circle (see p.16, etc. and compare Monts - Trois monts imbriqués nos.9 and 9A in Velkov, Les Filigranes dans les documents Ottomans), sturdy and well-burnished ; from p.59 through close, type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (horizontal), and grapes (raisin) watermark (see p.74, 80, etc.), thin and crisp though sturdy, well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Section headings and keywords rubricated.', 'Script: Maghribī ; two main hands ; opening hand (through p.58, supplying bulk of first two works) compact and somewhat angular ; hand supplying final two works (from p.59) more uniform ; both with inclination to the right, sweeping descenders, etc. ; occasionally vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 31 and 29 lines per page.', "Collation: i, VI+2 (14), III (20), III+3 (29), 3 VI(65) ; sexternions [senions] and ternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips added 'title page').", 'Colophon: [al-Masāʼil al-fiqhīyah] "Scribal," reads "انتهى ما اختصره ابو الفاسي رحمه الله من دواوين المالكية رضي الله عنهم على يد عبيد الله سبحانه الحسين ابن ابي القاسم غفر الله له ولوالديه ولاشياخه ولاخوانه ولجميع المسلمين والمسلمات الاحياء منهم والاموات ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم عام ١١۶۶ في شهر الله المعظم رجب الفرد بعد ان خلت منه ستة وعشرين ... والحمد لله رب العالمين" ; [al-Taysīr wa-al-tashīl] "كملت المغارسة بحمد الله وحسن عونه على يد ناسخها لنفسه ثم لمن شاء الله في بعده العبد الفقير الى رحمة ربه القدير الراجي عفو ربه وغفرانه احمد بن عبد العزيز بن سعد بن علي الجزائري الاصل والمنشأ المالكي مذهبا الاشعري اعتقادا البصري اعرابا غفر الله له ولوالديه ولاشياخه ولوالديهم ولجميع المسلمين ووافق الفراغ منها ضحوة يوم الجمعة لسبع بقين من شهر الله المعظم شعبان من عام ۱۱3۶ عرفنا الله خيره وسلام على جميع الانبياء والمرسلين والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: [al-Masāʼil al-fiqhīyah] "قال الشيخ ابو عمران الفاسي رضي الله عنه هذا ما اختصرنا من الدواوين دون التطويل من المسائل [مسائل] المدونة مسئلة في تزويج المراة بعد الوقوع والنزول ..." ; [Kitāb al-Taysīr wa-al-tashīl] "فيقول العبد الفقير الى الله ... عبد الرحمن بن عبد القادر ... الحمد لله الملك القديم العالم العلي العظيم الاكرم الكريم الرحمن الرحيم الخبير الحليم ... وبعد فلما كان باب المغارسة من جملة ما ينبغي للمؤلفين المختصرين ان يتعرضوا له ... طلب مني بعض اخواننا ... ان اجمع في الباب مسائل جملة [؟] وان اذكر في ذلك احكاما مهمة ... ولما لخصته وهذبته ودرجته وقربته ظهر ان اسميه بالتيسير والتسهيل في ذكر ما اغفله الشيخ خليل من احكام المغارسة والتوليح والتصيير ..."', "Title from added 'title page' (flyleaf).", 'Ms. composite codex.', '4. p.60-p.130 : al-Taysīr wa-al-tashīl fī dhikr mā aghfalahu al-shaykh Khalīl min aḥkām al-mughārasah wa-al-tawlīj wa-al-taṣyīr / Abū Zayd ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʻAbd al-Qādir al-Fāsī.', '3. p.59-p.60 : [Bāb nadb al-ghars from Mukhtaṣar Khalīl] / Khalīl ibn Isḥāq al-Jundī.', '2. p.44-p.58 : [book on fiqh opening in Bāb al-Ṭahārah and concluding in Bāb al-Nikāḥ].', '1. p.1-p.43 : al-Masāʼil al-fiqhīyah / Abū ʻImrān al-Fāsī.', 'Fine Maghribī copy of a collection of works on Mālikī law, opening with a collection of legal decisions attributed to Abū ʻImrān al-Fāsī (d.1038), followed by a work of Mālikī fiqh in the same hand opening in Bāb al-Ṭahārah and concluding in Bāb al-Nikāḥ, itself followed by Bāb nadb al-ghars or al-Mughārasah from al-Mukhtaṣar, the renowned compendium of Mālikī law by Khalīl ibn Isḥāq al-Jundī (d.1365), and concluding with a commentary on that very work, namely al-Taysīr wa-al-tashīl fī dhikr mā aghfalahu al-shaykh Khalīl min aḥkām al-mughārasah wa-al-tawlīj wa-al-taṣyīr by ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʻAbd al-Qādir al-Fāsī (d.1685).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 989', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974). Transcription likely from a printed edition (perhaps 1897 Tehran lithographed edition of a Majmūʻah, compare Princeton Near East Collections B753.M83 M374 1897 and cf. al-Dharīʻah, v.1, p.89).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 138', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "المشاعر الصدرية | J.H.D." ; sewn in white thread over three recessed cords, tightly bound ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a thin to medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 15-18 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, II+1 (5), 10 II(45), II+1 (50), i ; exclusively binions ; pagination in purple pencil, Hindu-Arabic numerals through page ١٠, then black ink through page ١٣ ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "فان من حيث وجوب استفادة الوجود منه تعالى يكون الواجب بالقياس اليه اولا وباعتبار احتياجه اليه في اقامة الوجود وادامته وتتميمه بالكمالات الثانية يكون منتهى واخرا فهو الاول والآخر"', 'Incipit: [al-Mashāʻir ] "نحمد الله ونستعين بقوته التي اقام بها ملكوت الارض والسماء وبكلمته التي انشأ بها نشأتي الاولى والاخرى على تهذيب القوى القابلة للاستكمال ... وبعد فاقل الخلائق قدرا وجرما واكثرهم خطأ وجرما محمد المشتهر بصدر الدين يقول ايها الاخوان السالكون الى الله بنور العرفان ..." ; [Risālah fī ithbāt ḥudūth al-ʻālam] "الحمد لله المتفرد بوجوب الوجود [وجوده] عن كل عين ... اما بعد فيقول الفقير الى عفو ربه الجليل العبد الخاشع الخاضع الذليل الشيخ حسين بن ابراهيم التنكابني عفي عنهما هذه رسالة في اثبات حدوث العالم ..."', 'Title from heading with table of contents on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', '5. p.92-p.97 : Risālah fī ithbāt ḥudūth al-ʻālam / Ḥusayn ibn Ibrāhīm al-Tunukābunī.', '4. p.91 : [blank].', '3. p.4-p.90 : Kitāb al-Mashāʻir al-Ṣadrīyah / Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī.', '2. p.3 : [blank].', '1. p.2 : [table of contents].', 'Careful copy of Kitāb al-Mashāʻir, the work on ontology by Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī (d.1641), renowned philosopher of the Ṣafavid period, followed by Risālah fī ithbāt ḥudūth al-ʻālam by Ḥusayn ibn Ibrāhīm al-Tunukābunī. Table of contents at opening (see p.2).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 909', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 58', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "شواهد التحقيق | المرتضوى | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion and tears to cloth at upper board corner.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact, modern hand in a medium to bold line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of inclination to the right, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 25-29 lines per page.', 'Collation: Pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, upper outer margin from p.4 to p.20 ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: [Kitāb al-Mashāʻir] "ثم الحيوان ثم الانسان فاذا استكمل بالعلم والعمل والكمال بلغ درجة العقل الفعال فيه يقف تركيب الخير والجود واتصل اوله آخر درجات الوجود تم بعون الملك الودود ... انك بذلك جدير وبكل خير حقيق" ; [al-ʻArshīyah] "هذه الامة في الابوة المعنوية كنية آدم ع الى"', 'Incipit: [Kitāb al-Mashāʻir] "باسمك اللهم وبحمدك نفتح هذا المقال ونصلي ونسلم على نبيك مركز دائرة الجلال ... نحمد الله ونستعين بقوته التي اقام بها ملكوت الارض والسماء وبكلمته التي انشأ بها نشأتي الآخرة والاولى على تهذيب القوى القابلة للاستكمال ... وبعد فاقل الخلائق قدرا وجرما واكثرهم خطأ وجرما يقول ايها الاخوان السالكون الى الله بنور العرفان ..." ; [al-ʻArshīyah] "بسمك اللهم وبحمدك الحمد لله الذي جعلنا ممن شرح صدره للاسلام فهو على نور من ربه ... اما بعد فيقول العبد الذليل المحتاج الى عفو ربه الجليل محمد بن ابراهيم المدعو بصدر الدين ... هذه رسالة اذكر فيها طائفة من المسائل الربوبية ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '3. p.49-p.103 : al-Risālah al-ʻArshīyah / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī.', '2. p.48 : [blank].', '1. p.1-p.47 : [Kitāb al-Mashāʻir] / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī.', 'Careful copy of two works by the renowned Ṣafavid philosopher Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī (d.1641), first Kitāb al-Mashāʻir, on ontology, followed by al-Ḥikmah al-ʻarshīyah, the popular work on knowledge of God and eschatology, apparently incomplete.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 861', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at the close of each book, copied by ʻAṭāʼ Allāh al-Ḥusaynī al-Hamadānī (عطاء الله الحسینی الهمدانی). As appears in colophon on p.108, transcription of first book (المجلد الاول) completed 14 Shaʻbān 1314 [ca. 18 January 1897]. As appears in colophon on p.205, transcription of the second book (المجلد الثانى) completed Rajab 1315 [November-December 1897]. As appears in colophon on p.332, transcription of the third book (المجلد الثالث) completed 25 Ramaḍān 1315 [ca. 17 February 1898]. As appears in colophon on p.435, transcription of the fourth book (المجلد الرابع) completed in Jumādá I 1316 [September-October 1898]. As appears in colophon on p.548, transcription of the fifth book (المجلد الخامس) completed 19 Shaʻbān 1316 [ca. 2 January 1899]. As appears in final colophon on p.670, transcription of sixth book (المجلد السادس), Khātimah and entire work completed Shawwāl 1316 [February-March 1899].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Meredith-Owens notes" -- b. Slip with note "Counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" -- c. Slip with notes in hand of G. Meredith-Owens "MO. 5. Mas̲navī of Rūmī copied by ʻAṭāʼullāh al-Ḥusainī al-Hamadānī in 1316"', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 10', 'Binding: Boards covered in black leather with straight grain appearance (appears to have been grained by boarding) ; reminiscent of Type II binding with flap, though flap extends from upper cover and rests outside the lower cover where it is fixed with a metal clasp with pin catch closure ; board linings and hinges in shell marbled paper (mainly in pink, blue and yellow) ; upper and lower covers carry blind-tooled rule-borders ; fore edge of text block purple-flecked ; sewn in dark red and bright green thread, four stations ; stuck-on endbands in red leather ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion and staining.', 'Support: European wove paper, beige in color, highly burnished.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of each book (mujallad / daftar) following the dībāchah (see pp.4, 112, 210, "438" [338], 438, 550) ; pieces vary in shape (though mainly large w-shaped pieces) but are similar in coloration, for example at opening on p.4, headpiece consists of a vertically elongated w-shaped piece filled with swirling floral vegetal decoration in lavender, orange-red and blue on a gold ground with white, blue and turquoise accents, set in an elaborate well of gold, blue, turquoise, red and black bands (others include rectangular piece setting off the basmalah) ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of a heavy gold band defined by black fillets with innermost red rule and outermost blue rule, divisions within (and outer margin) defined by narrow gold bands outlined in black fillets ; section headings rubricated or in blue ink.', 'Script: Naskh ; exquisite Persianate hand ; partially but irregularly seriffed with curvilinear descenders (some swooping), pointing in distinct dots, superscripting of final words and letters, mainly open counters, partially vocalized ; headings in seriffed tawqīʻ, fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 24 lines per page, with written area divided to four columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV (8), 2 III+1(22), 10 IV(102), IV+1 (111), 6 IV(159), III (165), IV+2 (175), 5 IV(215), IV+2 (225), 6 IV(273), 2 IV+1(291), 4 IV(323), V (333), I (335), i ; chiefly quaternions ; catch title (المجلد الاول, المجلد الثانى, الخ) at the head of each page ; some leaves left blank between the close of one book and dībāchah of the next book ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "الحمد لله الذى وفقنى بتسويد وتحرير هذه النسخة الشريفة فى يوم السبت من شهر شوال المكرم في سنه ۱۳۱۶ وانا العبد المذنب عطاء الله الحسينى الهمدانى غفر الله له ولوالديه امين"', 'Explicit: "قصه کوته کن که رفتم در حجاب هین خمش و الله اعلم بالصواب ... کرد شش باشد همیشه زان هوا"', 'Incipit: "بشنو از نی چون حکایت میکند از جداییها شکایت میکند ..."', 'Title from colophons on pp. 205, 332, and 548.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of Mawlānā Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī’s celebrated didactic poetical work in double verses.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 294', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.353a (p.705), transcription finished in Rabīʻ I "shahr Mawlid al-Nabī" 901 [Nov-Dec 1495].', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in fine dark brown leather; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in light brown leather ; upper and lower covers feature a large rectangular central field with intricate, repeating geometrical/vegetal pattern, bordered by a relatively narrow frame ; frame contains a series of small panels, in which elements of the central pattern are featured ; pattern continues onto flap ; doublures feature a central medallion with two smaller pendants and corner pieces, all with filigree design over a background of lapis lazuli and outlined in gold paint ; edges of textblock gold-flecked and carry gold-painted vegetal decoration ; sewn in white thread, two stations ; endbands in green and gold ; in very poor condition with lower cover completely detached at spine, front cover and flap both on the verge of detaching, though decoration is in good shape ; evidence of made endpapers in red marbled paper, now removed ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (Persian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and no chain lines visible ; lightly burnished ; relatively thin ; in good condition with some repairs and reinforcements.', 'Decoration: Fine illuminated headpieces (ʻunwān/ʻanāwīn) found at the openings of each of the six books of the work (pp.4-5, 116, 214, 350, 458, 576) ; illuminated marginal decoration surrounds the prose dībāchah (pp.2-3) with lapis lazuli frame filled with a repeating, rectilinear vegetal pattern in gold, white, black, turquoise, and red and tīghs executed in blue ; frontispiece at the opening of the first book carries the first verses set apart in a double-page illumination with exquisite decoration matching the style of the dībāchah pages, but more elaborate ; aside from initial folia, written area surrounded by heavy gold frame and outermost blue fillet ; chapter headings often rubricated or chrysographed and set in cloud-bands of pink and yellow (gold?) cross-hatching ; text of dībāchah and colophon chrysographed.', 'Script: Naskh ; headings and text of opening pages (dībāchah) done in tawqīʻ.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; incipit and facing page in 18 lines per page ; verses in frontispiece for opening book in 7 lines per page ; written area divided mainly into four columns, except on the initial pages of each book, which feature only a single column.', 'Collation: i, III+2 (8), 9 V(98), IV+1 (107), 24 V(347), IV-2 (353), ii ; chiefly quinions, with one anomalous ternion and two anomalous quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," in Arabic, reads: "تم الکتاب المثنوی المعنوی المولوی بحمد الله و منه في شهر مولود النبی علیه السلام سنه احدي وتسعمایه الهجریه"', 'Explicit: "قصه کوته کن که رفتم در حجاب هین خمش و الله اعلم بالصواب"', 'Incipit: "هذا کتاب المثنوی وهو اصول اصول اصول [كذا] الدین فی کشف اسرار الوصول والیقین ..."', 'Title from opening (p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', "Exquisite copy of Mawlānā Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī's didactic poetical work in double verses. Description provided by Derek Mancini-Lander."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 526', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.261, copied by ʻAbd al-Qādir al-Ḥabbāl with transcription completed 5 Dhū al-Qaʻdah 1264 [ca. 3 October 1848]. As appears in preceding authorial colophon on p.261 composition completed 16 Shaʻbān 1191 [ca. 19 September 1777].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in card file.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and fore edge flap label, "IL 365a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in printed paper (leaf-like forms in green, white, and black) with black leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted paper ; sewn in white thread, six stations ; worked chevron endbands in cream and black, fairly good condition ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of leather (especially at fore edge flap), paper and pasteboard, staining, detaching at spine, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark (72 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.6, 112, 113, etc.) ; quite sturdy though fairly transluscent, only lightly sized and burnished if so.', "Decoration: Keywords and text being commented upon rubricated ; several diagrams, mainly in red and black including diagram accompanying discussion of the Prophet's names (p.50), depictions of the rawḍah (p.86, 89, 90), sandal of the Prophet (p.145, 146), depiction of Jannah, al-Ṣirāṭ al-mustaqīm and al-Ṣirāṭ al-muʻwajj (p.221), and depiction of the head of a sheep (raʼs kharūf) as seen and described by al-Shaʻrānī (p.260).", 'Script: Naskh ; angular Egyptian [?] hand ; virtually serifless with effect of tilt to the right and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), some sweeping descenders, freely ligatured, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', "Collation: 13 V(130) ; exclusively quinions ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals under kāf mabsūṭah in the upper outer corner of the opening recto of each quire (in black ink and pencil) ; p.144 left partially blank to accommodate full page depiction of the Prophet's sandal on the following leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert).", 'Colophon: "Authorial," reads "تم الشرح المبارك تاليفا وجمعا وتحريرا على يد جامعه ... الفقير سليمان ... قبيل الزوال يوم الخميس المبارك السادس عشر من شعبان من شهور سنة الف ومائة واحدى وتسعين" ; "Scribal," triangular, reads "وكان الفراغ من كتابة هذه النسخة على يد افقر العباد واحوج العباد عبد القادر الحبال وذلك في يوم الاثنين بعد الظهر خامس شهر ذي القعدة من شهور سنة ١٢۶۴ الف ومائتين واربع وستين غفر الله لمن كتبه ..."', 'Explicit: "وتوعدت به من الثواب والعقاب والله اعلم وهذا اخر ما قصدت تمام الوعد الذي وعدت ولا امن ان اكون اسقطت او حرفت شيئا من متن الكتاب سهوا ... فان الخطا غير مستغرب من الانسان على عدم الاحسان وخصوصا مثلي قليل العلم ... والحمد لله الذي هدانا لهذا وما كنا لنهتدي لو لا ان هدانا الله وصلى الله وسلم على سيدنا ومولانا محمد ... صلاة وسلاما يتعاقبان على الدوام"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي اختص على رسوله حمدا صلى الله عليه وسلم بخالص حبه فكان اولى الخليقة واحقهم بربه ... وبعد فيقول العبد الفقير من العمل الراجي عفو ربه سليمان الجمل لما كانت الصلاة على النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم من اشرف الطاعات واعظم الوسائل الى القرب من رب البريات وكان اجل كتاب الف فيها دلائل الخيرات واكثر اشتغال الناس به في جميع الجهات ... شيخنا واستاذنا السيد الشريف محمد مجاهد الاحمدي ... فهو السبب في هذا الخير العظيم لان هذه الجمعية على قراة هذا الكتاب الشريف لم تسبق على يد غيره ... كان اعظم شرح وضع عليه مبسوطا مطالعا للعالم العلامة السيد محمد المهدي بن محمد بن علي بن يوسف الفاسي ورايت في طولا على الهمم القاصرات اختصرته اختصارا لطيفا مناسبا لزماننا الذي قصرت فيه الرغبة عن المبسوطات ... وسميته بالمنح الالهيات بشرح دلائل الخيرات ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3) and opening matter on p.4.", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Sulayman al-Jamal's (d.1789 or 90) commentary, itself an abridgment of the renowned commentary by al-Fāsī (d.1698), on al-Jazūlī’s (d.1465) celebrated collection of prayers for the Prophet, Dalāʼil al-khayrāt."])

en: (count: ['Title from spine.', 'Text rubricated and enclosed in borders of gold, blue, and red; extensive marginal commentary throughout; illumination on pp. [1-2]; substantial damage to pages with some repairs; purple silk bookmark; unusual leather and velvet binding (late 19th- early 20th cent.?); marbled edges.', 'Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm ibn Ḥusayn....', "Dates of copying and copyist's name in colophon: (Arabic and Persian) tamma ... min yad ʻabd al-ḍaʻīf ... Shāh Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm ibn Ḥusayn Zīrbāʾī ... rūz-i jumʻah māh-i Shawwāl vaqt-i ẓuhr sanat khams fa-sabʻīn fa-tisʻumiʾah [i.e. March-April 1568] ... [in margin] nuqilat min nuskhah nuqilat min nuskhat walad al-muʾallif ... wa-kāna naskh al-kitāb ... fī yawm al-aḥad wa-al-sābiʻ min Jumād al-awwal sanat khams wa-sabʻīn wa-tisʻumiʾah [i.e. 9 November 1567] ʻalá yad afqar Shāh", 'For the Ṣaḥīḥ itself, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 183.', 'Commentary by an unidentified author on the Ṣaḥīḥ of al-Bukhārī, a collection of traditions of the prophet Muḥammad.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 621', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.468, copied by Ismāʻīl ibn Ḥasan with transcription finished ("waqaʻa al-farāgh min kitābat...") 6 Ramaḍān 784 [ca. 13 November 1382].', 'Accompanying materials: Numerous inserted slips, some tipped-in and others not, most paginated (pp.7-8, 9-10, 15-16, 17-18, 25-26, 31-32, 35-36, 37-38, 39-40, 45-46 [foll. p.48], unpaginated slip following p.50, 57-58, 59-60, 65-66, 67-68, 69-70, 71-72, 75-76 [scrap of lithographed paper], 83-84, 159-160, 169-170).', 'Former shelfmark: From inscription on inner front cover and spine label, "IL 352" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, now lost) ; marbled European laid paper applied over upper cover at some point, with much now lost ; board linings in salmon/pink-tinted European laid paper ; upper and lower covers appear distinct such that the binding appears to have been cobbled together from separate covers ; upper cover bears a tooled polylobed circular ornament (shamsah) with pendants and band separating a central disc filled with interlace, along with a tooled frame in heavy interlace (strapwork), all with gold-tooled accents (compare Bosch, et al. nos. 52, 55, 56) ; lower cover bears a tooled polylobed almond-shaped ornament with pendants and central panel filled with interlace, along with cornerpieces and tooled frame in interlace (strapwork), all with gold-tooled accents (compare Bosch, et al. no.80 and 81) ; sewing now mainly gone, though likely originally sewn in white and or blue thread, two stations ; many of the bifolia have now split ; endbands lost ; in poor condition with textblock entirely separated from cover, upper cover detaching from spine, flap lost, significant abrasion, etc. ; repairs in light brown leather.', "Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with 8-9 laid lines per cm. and alternating sets of 2 and 3 chain lines spaced 12 mm. apart (for the sets of 2) and 11-13 mm. apart (for the sets of 3) with 40-48 mm. separating the groups (compare Humbert's listings for papers for manuscripts copied 1372 in Aleppo).", 'Decoration: Red ink used occasionally in the glosses for overlining and or emphasis.', 'Script: Naskh (with Persianate features) ; mainly serifless ; small-medium in size, fairly readable, with a slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, and mainly closed counters ; free-standing alifs are sans serif, taper toward the bottom, and often have a slight left foot ; tail of final lām and kāf is often curving up to meet vertical stroke ; final yāʼ is often mardūdah ; kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred, with even final kāf bearing shaqq ; partially vocalized ; most of the glosses appear to be in the same hand, though more compact.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled (using a misṭarah) ; margins unruled, but with extensive glosses arranged rather artistically in geometric forms.', 'Collation: IV (8), 1+IV+2 (19), IV (27), VII (41), 10 V(141), IV (149), V (159), 3 IV(183), 2 V(203), 1+V (214) ; initial flyleaf is affixed to opening leaf ; based on the old foliation and other factors, there appears to be a missing quaternion that was originally between quire 2 and quire 3 (i.e. it would have carried fol.20-27) ; slip paginated pp.75-76 notes the lacuna, reads "ناقص من ۱۹ الى ٢٧" ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (haphazard, with missed and repeated folia, etc.) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads: "وقع الفراغ من كتابة المسمي بالمفصل على يد العبد الضعيف الراجي المؤمل الى رحمة الله تعالى العزيز الاجل حامدا لله ومصليا على نبيه محمد وآله اسمعيل بن حسن غفر الله له ولوالدين [كذا] ولمن ذكرهم بالخير والحسنين ما دام طالع هذه النسخة وصان في اليوم السادس من الشهر المبارك رمضان قبل ان يقع من كتابة حاشية سنة اربع وثمانين وسبعمائة"', 'Explicit: "واذا كانوا ممن يحذفون مع امكان الادغام في يتسع ويتقي فهم مع عدم امكانه احذف"', 'Incipit: "قال الاستاذ الامام الاجل فخر خوارزم رئيس الافاضل ابو القسم [القاسم] محمود بن عمر الزمخشري رحمة الله عنه الله احمد على ان جعلني من علماء العربية وجبلني على الغضب للعرب والعصبية وابى لي ان انفرد عن صميم انصارهم وامتاز وانضوى الى لفيف الشعوبية وانحاز ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Abū al-Qāsim Maḥmūd ibn ʻUmar al-Zamakhsharī's important compendium of Arabic grammar accompanied by glosses from the commentaries of Ibn Ya‘īsh (d.1245) and Aḥmad ibn Maḥmūd al-Jandī al-Andalusī (d. ca. 1300). Description provided by Noah Gardiner."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 928', 'Origin: As appears in authorial colophon on p.193, composition completed in Mashhad in the latter part of Jumādá II 895 [May 1490]. Lacks dated scribal colophon, though likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and eventually bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 77', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "تحقيق | مذاهب الشيعة | للطاهر الخلي | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Wove paper of a few different types, lined and unlined.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 24-27 lines per page.', 'Collation: Pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Authorial," reads "وقد فرغت من تسويده في اواخر شهر جمادى الاخرى احد شهور سنة خمس وتسعين وثمانمائة بالمشهد العلوي..."', 'Explicit: "خاتمة الكتاب المسطاب الذي هو ثمرة الالباب ولباب اللباب وفصل الخطاب ثم اني اختم كتابي فاقول اعلم ايدك الله ونفعك بما تعلم وتعمل ... وقد فرغت من تسويده في اواخر شهر جمادى الاخرى احد شهور سنة خمس وتسعين وثمانمائة بالمشهد العلوي ... انك بالاجابة جدير وعلى كل شيء قدير"', 'Incipit: "ثم تمثل بقول الاعشي اشتان ما يومي على كورها ويوم حيان اخي جابر فيا عجبا بينا هو يستقيلها في حياته اذ عقدها لآخر بعد وفاته لشد ما تشطرا ضرعيها فصيرها في حوزة خشناء يغلط كلهما ويخشن مسها ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Careful though acephalous copy (seemingly completing the text which appears in Isl. Ms. 921) of what appears to be Ibn Abī Jumhūr's (d. after 1499) Kitāb al-Mujlī or Mujlī mirʼāt al-Nūr al-munjī, a supercommentary upon his own kalām work, Maslak al-afhām fī ʻilm al-kalām and its commentary, al-Nūr al-munjī min al-ẓalām. Compare close (pp.192-193) with pp.584-585 in the 2008 reprint of Aḥmad al-Shīrāzī's lithograph edition."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 633', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.531, latter portion (from around p.471) copied by Ismāʻīl ibn ʻAbd al-Munʻim ibn Muḥammad ibn ʻAlwān al-Ḥimṣī al-Shāfiʻī, for his shaykh Yāsīn al-Sibāʻī whose father Muṣṭafá al-Sibāʻī copied the opening portion (opening to around p.470) with transcription completed 16 Dhu al-Hijjah 1191 [ca. 15 January 1778].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Two inventory cataloguing slips in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 328" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in yellow laid paper with light brown leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; sewing now gone, though two stations visible, many bifolia now split ; overall in poor condition with significant staining, abrasion, lifting and losses of leather and paper at spine and upper board, flap far too small and now deformed, etc. ; ill-fitting and likely never attached to this texblock, serves simply as wrapper ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of at least two types ; opening type with 12-13 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks including crown with grapes (raisin) above and name below (see p.10, 11, 128, 129, etc.) and other names (see p.8, 13, 159), medium cream to beige in color, thin though sturdy, well-burnished to glossy ; another type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 21-23 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of grapes (raisin) with crown above and name below and other names, etc. (e.g. "A FAVGERE" and "LANGUEDOC," see p.412, 414, 417, etc.), slightly thicker and denser, well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords and text being commented upon (matn Talkhīs al-Miftāḥ) rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; written area of first six quires (through p.118) surrounded by red rule-border.', "Script: Naskh ; two main, clear 'Syrian' hands ; opening hand virtually serifless, with effect of tilt to the left, rounded with curvilinear descenders, rightward descenders tapered, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf) ; hand changes around p.471, extensively seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs, pointing in distinct dots, adheres closely to baseline, only occasional very slight effect of tilt to the left.", 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 12 V(120), VI (132), 7 V(202), VI (214), V (224), IV (232), 3 V(262), III-1 (267) ; chiefly quinions ; quire numbering (signatures) in the form of full words on recto of first leaf of each quire beginning with the first ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly skips two pages between pp.29-30).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "وكان الفراغ من هذه النسخة نهار الخميس المبارك لسادس عشر يوم خلت من شهر ذي الحجة الحرام الذي هو من شهور سنة احدى وتسعين ومائة والف من الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلاة والتسليم تم على يد العبد الفقير الذليل المحتاج الى عفو ربه الغني الجليل عبده اسمعيل بن عبد المنعم بن محمد بن علوان الحمصي بلدا الشافعي مذهبا غفر الله له وذلك من اجل شيخه واستاذه الشيخ يس السباعي الذي اول الكتاب من خط والده مصطفى ابي السعود السباعي غفر الله له ولكل المسلمين آمين تم"', 'Explicit: "مشتملة على لفظ الفاتحة ومنطوية على حسن الخاتمة ختم الله لنا بالحسنى ويسر لنا الفوز بالذخرى الاسنى بحق النبي واله الاكرمين محمد واله اجمعين"', 'Incipit: "نحمدك يا من شرح صدورنا لتلخيص البيان في ايضاح المعاني ونور قلوبنا بلوامع البيان من مطالع المثاني ... وبعد فيقول المفنقر الى الله الغني مسعود بن عمر المدعو بسعد التفتازاني ... قد شرحت فيما مضى تلخيص المفتاح"', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the shorter commentary of al-Taftāzānī upon Talkhīṣ al-Miftāḥ by Jalāl al-Dīn al-Qazwīnī (d.1338), an abridgment of the third part of Miftāḥ al-ʻulūm by al-Sakkākī (d.1229), on rhetoric (ʻilm al-maʻānī wa-al-bayān).'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Anchor in circle; initials HA. For the former see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), nos. 1-8.', 'Text rubricated and enclosed in thin red double border; marginal corrections in hand of copyist; written on p. [1]: min al-majmūʻ/kurrās 5.', 'Date and name of copyist in colophon: [?]... li-nafsihi wa-li-man shāʾa Allāh min baʻdihi Abū Bakr ibn Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd Allāh ibn ʻUthmān al-Miṣrī thumma al-Buḥayrī thumma al-Kh[?] thumma al-Azharī thumma al-Ḥanafī wa-kāna ibtidāʾ kitābatihi ṣubḥīyat yawm al-Jumʻah thānī shahr Ṣafar sanat sabaʻ wa-alf wa-kāna tamāmuhu yawm al-ithnayn al-ḍuḥá Khamīs al-shahr al-madhkūr [7 September 1598].', 'For other commentaries by Ibn al-Hāʾim on his al-Muqniʻ, see Mich. Isl. Mss. 701 and 703. Another commentary by an unidentified author is Mich. Isl. Ms. 700.', '"A commentary on the poem by Ibn al-Hāʾim entitled Al-Muḳniʻ fī ʻilm al-jabr wa-al-muqābalah." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945. The other two works listed on the title page are absent from the item in hand.'])

en: (count: ['Title and text rubricated.', "For other abridgments of and commentaries on Ibn al-Hāʾim's Muqniʻ, see Mich. Isl. Mss. 700,2, 702, and 703.", '"al-Musriʻ, an abridgement of al-Mumtiʻ, compiled in 810 H [1407]." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 69.', '"A poem on algebra with unidentified commentary [not the same as that of Mich. Isl. Ms. 702]." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Title and text rubricated; marginal notes and corrections in hand of copyist and others.', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.46, copied by ʻAbd al-Laṭīf ibn [?] Mūsá al-ʻUmarī al-Shāfiʻī with transcription completed 17 [?] Rabīʻ I 932 [ca. 1 January 1526].', '"An abridgement of the author\'s Murshidat al-ṭālib. In a muqaddima, two bābs, and a khātima." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 221', 'Origin: As appears in authorial colophon on p.838, composed in Mecca. Details on the origin of this copy lacking. Paper, hand, decoration, etc. suggest early 17th century (see Velkov, Les filigranes dans les documents ottomans). Date of waqf-seal impression provides a terminus ante quem of 1782.', 'Former shelfmark: "71 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" and "51" in pencil on front flyleaf (affixed to opening leaf) ; "124" in Hindu-Arabic numerals on tail of text block.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered with black leather ; Type II binding (with flap), two-piece binding (seam of overlapping hinges visible at spine) ; doublures in red leather ; upper and lower covers carry large, stamped (red recessed onlays) and gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. NA 4), pendants and cornerpieces as well as tooled and gold-painted chain and rule borders ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn in white thread, two stations (repair to opening gathering in rose thread) ; worked chevron endbands in white and blue, good condition, primaries sewn through inner leather spine lining ; overall in fairly good condition with some abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: Gatherings mixed with leaves of non-European (likely Persianate) and European laid paper of at least two types ; all fairly thin, crisp and extremely well-burnished ; leaves of likely Persianate laid paper exhibiting especially cloudy formation with laid lines vertical but difficult to measure ; leaves of European laid paper, least two types, both with roughly 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 30-33 mm. apart (vertical, difficult to examine) and watermarks of cross in tear-drop shape with letters below (see p.68, 80, etc.) and of anchor in circle with trefoil above (see p.266, etc.).', 'Decoration: Splendid double-page illumination on pp.2-3 executed in gold, blue, orange-red, and white, consisting of rectangular panels corresponding to the written area, the panel of the right-hand with five large cartouches (set off by arabesques and floral motifs) carrying text "ونسخة قاموس قد تحررت بها مد مجد الدين فى الطرس ابحرا ففاخرت الافلاك فيها موادها وقد ملئت تبرا ودرا وجوهرا صلى الله على من لا نبي بعده وسلم" executed in white thuluth on gold grounds and surmounted by a rectangular headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ), the panel of the facing page with similar headpiece surmounting rectangular pieces carrying title, central medallion (shamsah) carrying an authorship statement, and rectangular piece with the ṣalwalah, all text in white on gold grounds set off by blue and red vegetal accents ; frames of gold, red, and blue rules defined by black fillets surround panels of opening illuminated titlepiece / frontispiece and incipit and facing pages ; illuminated roundels appear in the margins of all of the opening illuminated pages as well ; similar illuminated headpieces with cartouches carrying the basmalah, etc. appear on incipit page and facing page of the opening half of the text (pp.4-5) as well as at the opening of the second half (p.432) ; further rectangular headpieces set off chapter headings ; gold rule borders throughout ; section headings chrysographed, many keywords (terms) and letters (abbrevation symbols) rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of gold discs.', 'Script: Naskh ; small, elegant Syro-Egyptian or Turkish hand in a thin line ; mainly serifless with slight effect of inclination to the left, some elongation of horizontal strokes, curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots ; mainly vocalized ; chapter headings, section headings, and keywords (terms) in larger script reminiscent of tawqīʻ.', 'Layout: Written in 37 lines per page ; impression of ruling board evident.', 'Collation: i (affixed to opening leaf), 3 V(30), V-2 (38), V (38), V-2 (56), 4 V(96), IV+1 (105), V (115), IV+1 (124), 5 V(174), IV+1 (183), V (193), 2 IV(209), III (215), 3 V(245), 2 II (249), 1 (250), 3 V(280), V-1 (289), V-2 (297), 4 V(337), V-1 (346), V (356), IV (364), V-3 (371), 2 V(391), V-1 (400), V (410), V-1 (419) ; chiefly quinions with several anomalous quires ; pages between the two halves of the work left blank (see p.430 and 431) ; catchwords present ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals, upper outer corner of the recto of the first leaf of each quire (3rd through 23rd, first half of the work) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Authorial," rectangular, reads, "قال مؤلفه الملتجي الى حرم الله تعالى محمد عفا الله عنه ابن يعقوب بن محمد الفيروزاباذي رحمهم الله تعالى هذا اخر القاموس المحيط والقابوس الوسيط عنيت بجمعه وتأليفه وتهدينه وترصيفه ولم ال جهدا في تلخيصه وتخليصه واتقانه راجيا انه يكون خالصا لوجه الله ورضوانه وقد يسر الله تعالى اتمامه بمنزلي على الصفا بمكة المشرفة تجاه الكعبة المعظمة زادها الله تعالى لعظما وشرفا وهيأ لقطان باحثها من بحابح الفراديس غرفا ونقع بهذا الكتاب المكنسي من تركها اخوانه وحسنه بالقبول لتستعير من حسنه الغواني لطائف المعاني أجزل من فضله العميم ثوابي وجعله نورا بين يدي يوم حسابي والحمد لله...والصلوة...وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وسلم"', 'Explicit: "لان قبلها كسرة تخلفها ويا الجزم المنبسط رأيت عبدي الله لم تسقط لانه لا خلف عنها"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله منطق البلغا باللغى في البوادي ومودع اللسان السن اللسن الهوادي...وبعد فان للعلم رياضا وحياطا"', 'Title from illuminated titlepiece on p.3.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of al-Fīrūzābādī's renowned dictionary of the Arabic language."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 123', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.953, al-Qāmūs copied by Najm al-Dīn Aḥmad ibn ʻIlm al-Dīn Ibrāhīm al-ʻAbbāsī. Transcription finished ("wa-kāna al-farāgh min kitābatih...") 17 [?] Dhū al-Qaʻdah 934 [ca. 3 August 1528]. Lengthy authorial colophon also appears on p.953. As appears in colophons on p.17 and p.20, added opening commentary and biographical notice for al-Fīrūzābādī copied by ʻAlī ibn Muṣṭafá. Transcription finished Ṣafar 1166 [December 1752 or January 1753].', 'Accompanying materials: Scraps of paper inserted, some with notes (paginated pp.57-58, pp.261-262, pp.681-682) ; leaf from another ms. copy of this work also inserted (paginated pp.943-944).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 54. Al-Kamus al-muhit."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark olive green leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; doublures in red leather ; upper and lower covers bear large blind-stamped and gold-painted mandorla filled with floral vegetal composition (compare Déroche class. OAi 6) and surrounded by gold-painted accents, accompanied by gold-painted border of tooled fillets framing a roll in a series of s-shaped stamps ; doublures and interior of envelope flap carry simple border in tooled and gold-painted fillets ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; worked endbands in lime green and red, fair condition ; overall in poor condition with lower cover fully detached at spine, upper cover also detaching, flap lost, some abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, pest damage, etc. ; repairs in tan leather ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European laid paper (Persian?) with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), curving and sagging at head and tail, irregular chain lines, crisp and somewhat translucent ; added leaves preceding main text in European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 21-22 mm. apart (vertical), and three crescent (tre lune) watermark ; some staining.', 'Decoration: Illuminated titlepiece on \'title page\' (p.25) consists of rectangular panel carrying the title and introducing the author "كتاب القاموس المحيط والقابوس الوسيط في اللغة مولفه" ; this panel serves as a headpiece (ʻunwān) for the rectangular, full-page panel below, which carries a biographical notice for the author ; elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening of main text on p.26 consists of rectangular panel set in a well of narrow gold bands and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; rectangular panel bears cartouche carrying basmalah in white ink on a field of gold with swirling vegetal arabesque in green ; cartouche is flanked by vegetal accents in gold on a fields of blue ; entire panel surrounded by frame consisting of a central blue band with white cross pattern flanked by gold fillets ; written area throughout surrounded by frame consisting of gold band outlined by black fillets, with additional blue fillet appearing on incipit and facing page ; textual dividers in the form of gold dics appear on incipit and facing page ; text being commented upon in opening sharḥ, keywords, some entry/section headings, and abbreviations rubricated ; section headings and keywords occasionally chrysographed.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Syrian hand [?] ; virtually serifless ; open counters ; pointing in distinct dots ; mainly tapered descenders ; fully vocalized ; added opening commentary supplied in a naskh with influence of nastaʻlīq, virtually serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters.', 'Layout: Written in 35 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: VI (12), 25 V(262), IV (270), 8 V(350), IV (358), 12 V(478) ; chiefly quinions ; final three leaves left blank ; Hindu-Arabic numerals appear irregularly at mid-quire ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts ; skips first leaf and two pages between pp.33-34).', 'Colophon: [Sharḥ Khuṭbat al-Qāmūs] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت الرسالة المنيفة الشريفة على يد احقر العباد واحوجهم علي بن محمد في يوم الثلثة في وقت الضحوة الكبرى في شهر صفر في سنة ست وستين ومائة والف" ; [Tarjamat al-muʼallif al-Fīrūzābādī] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت هذه الرسالة الشريفة وقت العصر في شهر صفر سنة ست وستين ومائة والف تم تم تم تم تم تم" ; [al-Qāmūs] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "وكان الفراغ من كتابته في يوم الثلثاء بين الظهر والعصر السابع [؟] عشر من شهر ذي القعدة الحرام شهور سنة اربعة وثلاثين وتسع مائة ... على يد العبد الفقير الذليل الحقير المعترف بالعجز والتقصير الراجي عفو ربه العفو القدير من ليس لفضل مولاه ناسي احمد المدعو نجم الدين بن ابراهيم علم الدين العباسي عفا الله عنهما وغفر لهما وختم لهما بخير امين والحمد لله رب العالمين وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل وصلى الله وسلم على من لا نبي بعده واله وصحبه والتابعين بعده"', 'Explicit: [al-Qāmūs] "لان قبلها كسرة تخلفها ويا الجزم المنبسط رأيت عبدي الله لم تسقط لانه لا خلف عنها"', 'Incipit: [Sharḥ Khuṭbat al-Qāmūs] "الحمد لله وسلام على عباده الذين اصطفى ولمياء منهم يزول قلق الرب ويحصل طأمنينة اليقين والشفاء اما بعد فقد سألني بعض الاخوان من اعيان الزمان ان اشرح لهم خطبة القاموس ..." ; [al-Qāmūs] "الحمد لله منطق البلغاء باللغي في البوادي ومودع اللسان اللسن الهوادي ... وبعد فان للعلم رياضا وحياضا ...والفت هذا الكتاب محذوف الشواهد مطروح الزوائد ... واسميته القاموس المحيط لانه البحر الاعظم ..."', "Title from titlepiece on 'title page' (p.25).", 'Ms. composite codex.', '5. p.954-p.960 : [blank].', '4. p.25-p.953 : al-Qāmūs al-muḥīṭ wa-al-qābūs al-wasīṭ / al-Fīrūzābādī.', '3. p.21-p.24 : [blank].', '2. p.17-p.20 : Tarjamat al-muʼallif al-Fīrūzābādī.', '1. p.2-p.17 : Sharḥ Khuṭbat al-Qāmūs / ʻĪsá ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥīm.', "Elegant copy of al-Fīrūzābādī’s (d.1414 or 15) renowned dictionary of the Arabic language. Preceded by a commentary on the dictionary's preface by ʻĪsá ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥīm (see Kashf al-ẓunūn 2/1308 and GAL, S II 234) and a biographical entry for al-Fīrūzābādī, both copied much later than the main text and supplied on added leaves."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 587', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.414, transcription completed 24 Muḥarram 1072 [ca. 19 September 1661].', 'Accompanying materials: Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Binding: Pasteboards (quite thin, semi-limp) covered in brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in brown leather ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition compare Déroche class. OAi 13) along with tooled rule border ; sewn in lime-green thread, two stations ; only traces of headband remain ; overall in somewhat poor condition with lower cover completely detached at spine, lifting and losses of leather, much abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of at least two types ; mainly with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-27 mm. apart (horizontal), paschal lamb in four-lobed circle watermark (53 mm. tall, see p.401, 414, etc.), and "Td" under trefoil countermark (see p.412), well-burnished to glossy, light cream in color, sturdy though fairly thin and translucent ; occasionally a type with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), and anchor in circle watermark ; staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated (text to be entered in red supplied in upper margin, occasionally visible) ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', "Script: Naskh ; compact, angular Egyptian or 'Syrian' hand in a medium line ; virtually serifless with pointing mainly in strokes rather than distinct dots, some elongation of horizontal strokes, more rectilinear descenders.", 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V-1 (9), 19 V(199), V-1 (208) ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly repeats p.23).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads " اللهم صلي [صل] وسلم وبارك على اشرف عبادك سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين وكان الفراغ من نسخه في رابع عشرين شهر محرم الحرام افتتاح عام اثنين وسبعين والف حسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل"', 'Explicit: "قال ابو حنيفة والشافعي واحمد له ذلك وقال مالك لا يجوز له ذلك والله تعالى اعلم تم هذا الكتاب بحمد الله الملك الوهاب ... والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي اجزل احسانه وانزل قرأنه وبين فيه قواعد دينه ... وبعد فان معرفة الاجماع واختلاف العلماء من اهم الاشياء وذلك اثر [امر] لازم في حق المجتهد والحكيم ...هذا مختصر ان شاء الله تعالى نافع كثير من مسائل الخلاف ... وسميته رحمة الامة في اختلاف الائمة ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the treatise on disputed legal questions among the different madhāhib.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 486', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests 16th or early 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (paginated pp.1-2).', 'Former shelfmark: From spine label and inscription on interior of upper cover, "IL 154 " (likely supplied by Yahuda, see Acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in yellow-tinted laid paper with spine in tan leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; boardlinings in untinted paper ; sewn in grey thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and yellow, fair condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: Mainly non-European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines visible and apparently grouped (perhaps in threes with roughly 39 mm. between groups), well-burnished and sturdy though not especially thick ; replacement leaves in European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22-25 mm. apart (horizontal), and three hats watermark (compare Heawood 2595-2599).', 'Decoration: Some section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of three inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; two main Turkish or Persian hands, original and that supplying text of replacement leaves ; original hand mainly serifless, with slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, freely ligatured and thoroughly vocalized ; replacement hand serifless with pointing in distinct dots, some elongation of horizontal strokes, kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred, and many open counters.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 15 lines per page (original) ; replacement leaves in 13-20 lines per page.', 'Collation: 7 V(70), II+1 (75) ; chiefly quinions ; a number of leaves not original, but replacement leaves ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert).', 'Explicit: "واعطي يوم الاثنين لمحمد صلى الله عليه وسلم ولثلاث وستون نبيا مرسلا صلوات الله وسلامه عليهم اجمعين واعطي الثلاثاء للانبياء صلوات الله عليهم اجمعين والاربعاء ليعقوب عليه السلام والخميس لادم عليه الصلوة والسلام والجمعة لامة محمد صلى الله عليه وسلم تم الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله العزيز الجبار العزيز الغفار المهيمن الستار والصلاة على السيد المختار محمد سيد الابرار وعلى اله واصحابه المصطفين الاخيار ما تعاقب الليل والنهار وسلم تسليما فاعلم ان الخالق البارك خلت قدرته وعلت كلمته ... زين الاشياء السبعة ثم زين السبعة بسبعة اخرى ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of a collection of preaching material for each day of the week. Description provided by Maxim Romanov.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 301', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.261, transcription completed 1 Dhū al-Qaʻdah 942 [ca. 22 April 1536].', 'Former shelfmark: "188 T. De. M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" in pencil on recto of front flyleaf (p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in light brown leather with central mandorla in filigree appliqué (once gold-painted) over area of blue pigment as well as tooled and gold-painted border and accents ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OAi), pendants and cornerpieces as well as tooled and gold-painted border ; design continues on fore edge flap ; edges of text block gold-painted ; now sewn in white thread, two stations, other sewing holes visible ; worked chevron endbands in green and gray, fairly good condition ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; subtle repairs at board edges, hinges, etc. in dark red-brown leather ; fore edge flap may be a replacement.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (fairly indistinct) ; replacement leaves in a different (likely Persian or Indian) paper, medium cream in color, quite sturdy, crisp, well-sized and burnished to glossy ; some leaves guarded or repaired ; some pigment breakthrough at frames ; flyleaf in European laid paper, possibly recycled as it bears a leather burn pattern not corresponding to the present cover.', 'Decoration: Splendid once double-page illumination at opening (pp.2-3, though opening leaf has been replaced with a complementary piece of different style and quality) originally consisting of large rectangular panels each divided to central rectangular panel carrying opening text set off by cloud-bands (in gold with floral accents), flanked by vertical rectangular panels with gold lozenges on a lapis lazuli ground overlaid with swirling arabesques in gold, red, lavender, white, light blue, etc. and set off by upper and lower rectangular panels with gold cartouches carrying the title (originally) and author ("شيخ مصلح اليدن عليه الرحمة والغفران") in white surrounded by similar swirling arabesques on fields of gold and lapis lazuli evoking book cover design with borders of gold interlace ; entire rectangular panel surrounded by a border of lozenges in lapis lazuli with floral vegetal decoration in white, gold, red, etc. and a series of scalloped domes in gold on a lapis lazuli ground overlaid with similar swirling arabesques with perpendicular stalks (tīgh) ; elsewhere throughout, written area surrounded by frame consisting of a series of gold, light blue, dark red, and turquoise bands with outermost blue fillet, divisions within defined by narrow gold bands outlined with black fillets ; section headings set off in rectangular headpieces (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) carrying headings in blue.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; exquisite hand in a thin to medium line ; serifless with effect of inclination to the right, words descending to baseline, elongation and slight contrast in thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV-4+4 (8), 3 IV(32), 2 (34), II (38), 11 IV(126), III (132) ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes opening flyleaf and skips two pages between pp.145-146).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تحريرا فى تاريخ غره شهر ذي القعدة الشريفه سنه ۹۴۲ تم"', 'Explicit: "بضاعت نیاوردم الا امید خدایا ز عفوم مکن نا امید"', 'Incipit: "بنام خداوند جان آفرین حکیم سخن در زبان آفرین خداوند بخشنده ی دستگیر کریم خطا بخش پوزش پذیر عزیزی که هر کز درش سر بتافت..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Būstān, the celebrated mas̲navī of Saʻdī (d.1292), renowned Persian poet and prose writer.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 211', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests 16th or early half of 17th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "٤" in black ink on recto of front flyleaf ; "513 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "134" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.3) ; "۹۲" on tailedge of text block.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; flyleaves and pastedowns in mauve surface-dyed wove paper ; upper and lower covers bear exquisite gold-tooled central scalloped lozenge (filled with vegetal composition reminiscent of Déroche class. OSd 9) with pendants, gold-painted accents, and guilloché roll border ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and purple, excellent condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, etc.', 'Support: non-European (Persian) laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (mainly horizontal, with some curving and sagging) and chain lines, possibly grouped ; well-burnished to glossy ; crisp though thick and sturdy ; some pest damage.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece at opening on p.4 consisting of two rectangular panels ; the lower with gold-filled cartouche carrying the basmalah in white set in a field of lapis lazuli with swirling floral vegetal pattern in black, gold, light blue, lavender, red, and green ; surrmounted by rectangular panel with floral pendant shapes in gold accented by similar swirling floral vegetal pattern on a field of lapis lazuli ; all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in lapis lazuli and set in a well of gold extending from the frame surrounding the written area below ; keywords and section headings rubricated ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of gold band outlined by black fillets.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; virtually serifless with gentle effect of words descending to baseline ; pointing in distinct dots, occasionally oriented vertically ; hāʼ looking like two inverted commas ; mainly closed counters.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, II+2 (6), 8 IV (70), IV+1 (79), ii ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf and skips two pages each between pp.5-6 and pp.21-22).', 'Explicit: "حدثنا محمد بن علي اخبرنا النضر اخبرني ابن عون عن ابن سيرين قال هذا الحديث دين فانظروا عمن تاخذوا دينكم تم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين اخبرنا الشيخ الفقيه الامام العالم رضي الدين ابو الثناء حماد بن هبة الله بن حماد بن فضيل بن الفضيلي الحراني قال اخبرنا الشيخان الامامان الثقتان ابو المحاسن مسعود بن محمد بن غانم الغافقي قرأة عليه بمنزله بهواه في اوائل سبع واربعين وخمسمائة وابو شجاع عمر بن ابي الحسن محمد بن ابي عبد الله بن محمد بن عبد الله بن نصر البسطامي اجازة قال ... اخبرنا ابو عيسى بن محمد بن عيسى بن سورة الترمذي الحافظ قال باب صفة رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم حدثنا ابو رجاء قتيبة ابن سعيد عن مالك بن انس عن ربيعة بن ابي عبد الرحمن عن انس بن مالك انه سمعه يقول كان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم ليس بالطويل البائن ولا بالقصير وليس بالابيض الامهق ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of al-Tirmidhī's collection of traditions comprising the Prophet's characteristics as transmitted eventually to Abū al-Thanāʼ Ḥammad ibn Hibat Allāh ibn Ḥammād ibn Fuḍayl al-Fayḍalī al-Ḥarrānī, whose name appears at the beginning of the opening ascription."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 488', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. suggest late 18th century, ca. 1781.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 231" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in quite dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted European laid paper (watermark visible in lower board lining) ; upper and lower covers carry tooled border with rosette like accents ; sewn in light yellow or pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in brown and cream, only tail band remains ; overall in fair condition with some staining, abrasion, losses of leather at fore edge flap, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper mainly with alternating bifolia tinted dull-yellow ; untinted leaves with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27-28 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks including "ALMASSO" (see p.10), arms / scrollwork with crown above (see p.14), and "G M" (see p.20), crisp, thin and transluscent, well-burnished ; dull-yellow paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-28 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks including circle with three fleurs de lis and crown above (see p.16), "L POLVARET DE IZERON 1780" (see p.22) and "L POLVARET DE IZERON 1781" (see p.26), thin, transluscent and well-burnished ; another type with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 24-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and grapes (raisin) below crown watermark (see p.102) ; another type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 21-22 mm. apart (horizontal) and three stylized hats watermark (see p.156, 157, etc.) ; flyleaves in a paper with watermark of cross flanked by lions with circles below ("B A" in one circle).', 'Decoration: Keywords and abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke) rubricated.', "Script: Naskh ; elegant 'Ottoman' or Iraqi [?] hand in a narrow to medium line, initially smaller and from p.50 or so larger but also somewhat denser though sweeping ; partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on virtually all ascenders excepting free-standing alif, effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes or conjoined dots, some elongation of horizontal strokes.", 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, V+1 (11), 7 V(81), i ; Chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert and flyleaves).', 'Explicit: "حدثنا محمد بن علي اخبرنا النضر اخبرني ابن عون عن ابن سيرين قال هذا الحديث دين فانظروا عمن تاخذون دينكم تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب الواهبين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله وسلام على عباده الذين اصطفى قال الشيخ الحافظ ابو عيسى محمد بن عيسى بن سورة الرمدى [الترمذي] رحمه الله باب ما جاء في خلق النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم حدثنا ابو رجاء قتيبة بن سعيد عن مالك بن انس عن ربيعة بن ابي عبد الرحمن عن انس بن مالك رضي الله عنه انه سمعه يقول كان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم ليس بالطويل البائن ولا بالقصير وليس بالابيطر [بالابيض] الامهق ولا بالادم ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of al-Tirmidhī’s collection of traditions comprising the Prophet’s characteristics.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 106', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.871, transcription complete ("wa-kāna al-farāgh min naskhat al-sharīfah [?]...") 28 Ramaḍān 1253 [ca. 26 December 1837].', 'Accompanying materials: Various inserted slips with notes, etc. (pp.81-82, pp.565-567, between pp.590-591 [not paginated], and pp.723-724, tipped in)', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 9. Work on excellences of the Prophet Muhammad." ; on tailedge of textblock "٢٢".', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in yellow wove paper ; upper and lower covers bear decorative tooled and gold-painted guilloché roll border framed by gold fillets with floret accents in corners ; sewn in rose-colored thread, two stations ; endbands at head and tail in white ; in poor condition ; back cover has split from codex as well as final signature ; leather repair on spine split and abraded at corners and showing severe red rot.', 'Support: mainly European laid paper with 12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (vertical) ; burnished ; leaves varying in heft ; watermarks include crown surmounted by fleur de lis, eagle in profile with spread wings, countermark "LV", and scrollwork ; added table of contents in wove paper.', 'Decoration: Simple illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.26 consisting of gold-painted rectangular panel surmounted by gold-painted semi-circular piece (dome) with vertical stalks (tīgh) in black ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by heavy gold frame ; textual dividers in the form of gold discs appear on incipit and facing page ; section headings, some vocalization scattered throughout codex, and notabilia markers in text rubricated ; occasional textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red ;', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand ; partially seriffed ; mainly open counters ; curvilinear descenders ; effect of tilt to the left.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 2 V(20), V+1 (31), 20 V(231), V+1 (242), 18 V(422), IV (430), V (440), i ; chiefly quinions ; no proper catchwords, but last word of final line on verso of each leaf is repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during digitization, includes flyleaves and three inserts ; drops ten pages with p.665 followed by p.656).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "والحمد لله و كفى اسئله الوفاء وكان الفراغ من نسخة الشريفة في وقت الضحى في يوم الاربع الثمانية و العشرين من شهر رمضان المبارك سنة ثلاث و خمسين و ماتين و الف سنة ١٢٥٣"', 'Explicit: "فهو الجواد الذي لا يخيب من امله ولا ينتصر من خذله ولا يرد دعوة القاصدين ولا يصلح عمل المفسدين وهو حسبنا ونعم الوكيل و صلى الله على سيدنا و نبينا محمد خاتم النبيين وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين وسلم تسليما كثيرا دائما الى يوم الدين ورضي الله تعالى عن اصحاب رسول الله اجمعين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله المتفرد باسمه الاسمى المختص بالملك الاعز الاحمى الذي ليس دونه منتهى ولا وراءه مرمى ... اما بعد اشرق الله قلبي وقلبك بانوار اليقين ولطف لي ولك بما لطف به لاوليائه المتقين"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the treatise on devotional obligations towards the Prophet, illuminating his virtues and characteristics. Description provided mainly by Sarah Mirza.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 496', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.85, copied by ʻAbd Allāh ibn Ḥamīd ibn ʻAbd Allāh al-Sharshīmī with transcription completed ("wa-kāna al-farāgh min naskhihā...") 15 Ṣafar 864 [ca. 11 December 1459].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 47a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (mainly orange, blue, and pink) with traces of red-brown leather over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins ; spine and fore edge flap now covered (and lined) in lavender textile repair ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; sewing gone, though stations apparent ; overall in poor condition with abrasion, lifting and losses of paper, leather and cloth, delamination of boards, etc. ; likely not original, serves more as a wrapper (as is fully detached from textblock, perhaps never attached).', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines grouped in threes (horizontal) with 9-11 mm. between chains and 40-49 mm. between groups, fairly diffuse ; sturdy, burnished and fairly smooth ; replacement leaves in European laid paper, possibly of two different types, mainly with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23 mm. apart (horizontal), and crown-star-crescent watermark (75 mm. tall, see pp.13-36).', 'Decoration: Section headings and some abbreviation symbols rubricated.', "Script: Naskh ; fine Egyptian or 'Syrian' hand ; virtually serifless with closed and open counters, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ, the lām alif al-warrāqīyah preferred, descenders mainly curvlinear, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf) ; fully vocalized ; replacements and repairs in a different hand.", 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page with written area divided to two columns to set off the verses, section headings centered ; frame-ruled for two columns (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: 16 (16), I (18), 2 V(38), I (40), I+1 (43) ; many bifolia split ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمت بحمد الله وعونه وحسن توفيقه وكان الفراغ من نسخها يوم الثلاثا المبارك خامس عشر شهر صفر الخير سنة اربع وستين وثمان مائة على يد العبد الفقير الى الله تعالى عبد الله ابن حميد ابن عبد الله الشرشيمي غفر الله له ولوالديه ولمن طالع فيها او نظر فيها ودعا له بالتوبة والمغفرة ولجميع المسلمين وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل"', 'Explicit: "قربنا المحمود والمشكور اليه منا مترجع [ترجع] الامور وافضل الصلاة والسلام على النبي سيد الانام تمت بحمد ربنا وعونه وجوده وفضله ومنه"', 'Incipit: "يقول راجي ربه المقتدر عبد الرحيم بن الحسين الاثري من بعد حمد الله ذي الالاء على امتنان جل عن احصاء ... فهذه المقاصد المهمة توضح من علم الحديث رسمه نظمتها تبصرة للمبتدي تذكرة للمنتهي والمسند لخصت فيها ابن الصلاح ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of the author's Alfīyah, or Tabṣirat al-mubtadī wa-tadhkirat al-muntahī or al-Maqāṣid al-muhimmah tūḍiḥu min ʻilm al-ḥadīth rasmuh (see opening matter on p.2), itself a versification of Kitāb Maʻrifat anwāʻ ʻilm (‘ulūm) al-ḥadīth or ʻUlūm al-ḥadīth of ‘Uthmān Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ al-Shahrazūrī (d.1243)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 516', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.419, copied by al-Sayyid Sulayman Adīb al-Qayṣarī (Süleyman Edip el-Kayserî / Kayserili Süleyman Edip ) with transcription begun in Kayseri and completed in Erzurum 6 Rabīʻ II 1142 [ca. 29 October 1729]. A statement on p.420 in name of Muḥammad al-Dahrī (Mehmet Dehrî) and attested by Ibrāhīm Aḥmad Saʻudī (İbrahim Ahmet Suudi) and Aḥmad Yaqīn [Baqiyah?] al-Shanṭūrī (Ahmet Yakin [Bakiye?] Şentûrî) may claim that half of the book [?] was written by al-Sayyid Muḥammad al-Sharīf (Seyyit Mehmet Şerif) reads "انا محمد الدهري الدلل [؟] كتب نصف [؟] هذا الكتاب السيد محمد الشريف والضمان علينا ضمان غرم الدلال في المكتوب [؟] كاتب محمد الدهرى شهد بذلك ابراهيم احمد سعودي الحنفى شهد بذلك احمد يقين [بقيه؟] الشنطورى".', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Insert with glosses (paginated pp. 73-74).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 241" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in quite dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; doublures (board linings) in comb marbled paper (red, pink, blue, yellow, green, etc.) with hinges in shell marbled paper (blue and brown) ; upper and lower covers carry gold-stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition employing cloud bands and with both vertical and horizontal symmetry, compare Déroche class. NSd) along with gold-tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps framed by gold fillets ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and likely another color difficult to discern due to damage, only headband remains ; overall in quite poor condition with flap lost, upper cover (along with front flyleaf and opening leaf) fully detached, lifting and losses of leather, abrasion, staining, etc. ; repairs (now split) to spine in light brown leather ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 13 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 24-25 mm. apart (horizontal), and grapes (raisin) under cartouche and crown watermark (see p.10, 15, etc.) ; dark cream in color, well-burnished, thin and transluscent though sturdy.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.4, consisting of a rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral accents in white and pink on a gold field and surrounded by border in blue with white crosses, surmounted by a scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) filled with swirling floral vegetal design reminiscent of arabesque in white, lavender, pink, orange, etc. on fields of blue and gold, set into a well of pink with white crosses and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and pink ; basmalah also flanked by floral accents ; written area surrounded by gilt frame ; keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; fine Turkish hand in a medium to bold line ; serifless with characteristic descent of words to baseline, occasionally more exaggerated, elongation and thickness of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 20 V(200), IV+1 (209) ; final leaf left blank ; almost exclusively quinions ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "وبدأت الطريقة المحمدية في القيصرية المحمية واتممت في ارض روم المحروسة وانا الفقير اليه سبحانه وتعالى السيد سليمان اديب القيصري احسن الله حاله في اليوم السادس عن ربيع الاخر لسنه اثنى واربعين ومائة والف سنه ۱۱٤٢"', 'Explicit: "وجلاء القلوب فعليك بها وطالعها حتى تعلم حقيقة مقالنا ونقول الحمد لله الذي هدانا لهذا وما كنا نهتدي لو لا ان هدانا الله ربنا لا تزغ قلوبنا بعد اذ هديتنا وهب لنا من لدنك رحمة انك انت الوهاب اللهم صل وسلم على محمد سيد المرسلين وعلى آله واصحابه اجمعين والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعلنا امة وسطا خير امم ... وبعد فان العقل والنقل متوافقان والكتاب والسنة متطابقان ... فاردت ان اصنف الطريقة المحمدية واحببت ان ابين السيرة الاحمدية حتى يعرض عليها عمله كل سالك ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant, ell-glossed copy of the sermons and homilies of Birgivî (Birkawī, Birgilī) Mehmet Efendi.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 560', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.497 and statement on p.498, copied by al-Sayyid Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥājj Zaynī [Zayn al-Dīn ?] ibn al-Ḥājj Isḥāq al-Kalajī [al-Karajī ?] (Mehmet b. Zeyni b. İshak el-Keleci [Keleçi ?]) in Mārdīn (Mardin). Dated statement following patronage statement on p.498 indicates copy was completed 18 Rabīʻ II 1191 [ca. 26 May 1777].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Two inventory cataloguing slips in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- c. Note with accounts (paginated pp.203-204).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover, \'title page\' (p.1) and spine label "IL 37" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in tan leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures (board linings) in a pink decorative paper with block-printed floral design in blue, green and an iridescent bronze ; upper and lower covers carry stamped (with onlays) mandorla and pendants (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition), as well as tooled border ; sewn in red-orange thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and cream, fairly good condition ; overall in somewhat fair condition though with significant staining, some abrasion, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper mainly with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), and "I" watermark (see p.150, etc.), quite dense and sturdy, well-burnished ; another type with 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart (horizontal), and "P S" mark visible (see p.452, 453, etc.) ; quire carrying pp.121-140 in a type with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart (horizontal), and scrollwork watermark (see p.130, 131, etc.).', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, titles of referenced works, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red hāʼ, three dots, etc.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Turkish [Crimean?] hand, varying slightly in size and thickness across sections ; partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs mainly on free-standing alif and lām al-taʻrīf, effect of tilt to the left, rounded with curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, point of final nūn set deep, almost encircled by bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 17 to 23 lines per page.', 'Collation: 24 V(240), IV+1-1 (248) ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes some inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تم الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب ... على يد الحقير الفقير ... السيد محمد بن الحاج زيني [زين الدين ؟] بن الحاج اسحاق الكلجي [الكرجي ؟] غفر الله له ولوالديه وللمؤمنين ولمن احسن اليهما وعلى روحهما الفاتحة م"', 'Explicit: "وقال ثبت للورثة ابتداء ويجوز ان يقال لا تورث عند ابي ح ويورث عندهما والولاء لا يورث بلا خلاف تاتارخان في الفرائض تم الكتاب وبالله التوفيق م م م م"', 'Incipit: "المسائل المتعلقة بالطهارة الحوض اذا كان مدورا فوقعت فيه النجاسة تعتبر فيه ثمانية واربعين ذراعا حتى ان ما دونه لا يجوز التوضي فيه ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of an extract, perhaps that prepared by the famous Ḥanafī author Burhān al-Dīn Ibrāhīm ibn Muḥammad al-Ḥalabī (d.1549) listed in GAL as al-Fawāʼid al-muntakhabah min al-Fatāwá al-Tātārkhānīyah, from the compilation of legal decisions from various sources, al-Fatāwá al-Tātārkhānīyah.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 126', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.161, copied from and collated with three manuscripts by ʻUmar ibn Muḥammad. Transcription finished ("ḥarrartu hādhā al-kitāb...qad waqaʻa al-farāgh...") mid-Ramaḍān 1177 [March 1764].', 'Accompanying materials: Slips bearing notes (paginated pp.71-72, pp.97-98, pp.155-156).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 87. Tarifat of Jurjani."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather with dark brown leather at spine, fore-edge flap and edges/turn-ins, now covered in paper and green-blue cloth ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in yellow laid paper ; sewn in black or dark blue thread, two stations ; enbands virtually gone with only traces of primaries and core remaining ; in poor condition with abrasion, lifting and losses to cloth, spine slant (cocked), and entire textblock warped, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 20-23 mm. apart (horizontal), and three hats watermark (similar to Heawood 2599 though later) ; well-burnished and smooth ; quite thin and translucent ; much staining.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviations rubricated ; textual divders in the form of discs in red ; diagram in margin on p.114 and on p.120.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq ; virtually serifless ; mainly closed counters ; effect of words descending to baseline, occasionally more exaggerated ; occasional extension of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 8 V(80) ; entirely quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "الحمد لله على التمام والصلوة والسلام على محمد سيد الانام وعلى اله واصحابه نجوم الظلام وانا الفقير عمر ابن محمد عفي عنهما الفرد الصمد تم تم تم ... حررت هذا الكتاب من نسخ ثلث وقابلته منها بعد التحرير ... قد وقع الفراغ في سنة سبع وسبعين ومائة والف من هجرة من له العز والشرف في اواسط رمضان المبارك في ليلة الاحد تم تم"', 'Explicit: "اليونسية وهو اصحاب يونس ابن عبد الرحمن قال الله تعالى على العرش تحمله الملائكة تمت"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله حق حمده والصلوة على خير خلقه محمد واله وبعد فهذه تعريفات جمعتها واصطلاحات اخذتها من كتب القوم ورتبتها على حروف الهجآء من الالف والباء الى الياء ..."', 'Title from opening (p.6).', 'Ms. codex.', "Neat copy of al-Jurjānī's dictionary of philosophical and Sufi terms, followed by brief excerpts of other works."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 452', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; hand and paper suggest very late 13th or 14th century.', "Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. -- c. Scrap marking 'hand change' (paginated pp.209-210).", 'Former shelfmark: From inscription on interior of upper cover, "IL 39a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip) ; "۲۸۰" on \'title page\' (p.3).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in block-printed paper (repeating star/flower, circle motif) over marbled paper (in blue and white) with spine and edges/turn-ins in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, now fully detached) ; board linings in laid paper ; sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked endbands in blue and white, largely intact ; overall in poor condition with upper cover entirely detached, flap entirely detached, abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper of medium thickness with 10 laid lines per cm (horizontal) ; chain lines difficult to examine but appear to be 2 sets of 3, with 16-18 mm. between lines and roughly 50 mm. between sets.', 'Decoration: Section headings and keywords setoff in larger, heavier script though not rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Syrian or Egyptian hand, larger in the opening and final section but smaller in between ; apparent hand changes around p.208 and again at p.363 ; opening hand mainly serifless, with alifs sometimes tapered with slight left foot (more pronounced in section headings), very slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to the left, mix of open and closed counters, and somewhat casually pointed ; following hands are very similar though second hand is certainly more compact with greater use of kāf mashqūqah in the final position and final hand is more liberally pointed (even alif maqṣūrah), with final hāʼ closed (approaching muḥdawdabah or makhṭūfah), and final yāʼ of في mardūdah ; often vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 21, 29 and 30 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', "Collation: 19 V (190) ; entirely quinions ; catchwords lacking (perhaps cutoff) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes scrap marking 'hand change').", 'Colophon: "Authorial," reads: "قال الشيخ هذا اخر ما تيسر من املاء كتاب التبيان في اعراب القرآن ونسأل الله ان يوفقنا لشكر ..."', 'Explicit: "قوله من الجنة هو بدل من شرٍ اعاده العامل اي من شر الجنة وقيل هو بدل من ذي الوسواس لان الموسوس من الجن وقيل هو حال من الضمير في يوسوس اي يوسوس وهو من الجن وقيل هو بدل من الناس اي في صدور الجنة وجعل من تبيينا واطلق على الجن اسم الناس لانهم يتحركون في مراداتهم والجن والجنة بمعنى وقيل من الجنة حال من الناس اي كائنين من القبيلين واما الناس لالخيار فقيل هو معطوف على ذي الوسواس اي من شر القبيلين وقيل هو معطوف على الجنة"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي وفقنا لحفظ كتابه ووقفنا على الجليل من حكمه واحكامه وآدابه والهمنا بتدبر معانيه ووجوه اعرابه وعرفنا فنون اساليبه من حقيقته ومجازه وايجازه واسهابه احمده على الاعتصام بامتن اسبابه واشهد ان لا اله الا الله وحده لا شريك له"', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of al-ʻUkbarī's philological commentary on the semantic grammar of the Qurʼān. Description provided by Noah Gardiner."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 61', 'Origin: As appears in colophon, copied by Dāwud ibn ʻAlī. Transcription finished ("qad faragha hādhā al-kitāb al-sharīf min taḥrīrih ʻan yad...") in the middle of Rajab 952 [September 1545].', 'Former Shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 133. Al-Yanabi"', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather; Type II binding (with flap); blind-tooled floral decoration forms central motif in diamond shape; four-pointed stars at diamond points; in poor condition.', 'Support: Non-European (perhaps Persian) laid paper, with obvious undissolved fibers and inclusions; in early quires paper is quite damaged with evidence of repair; in later quires smoother with more distinct laid lines; flyleaves and pastedowns are of European paper with three crescents watermark.', 'Decoration: Red-ruled borders surrounding written area and portions of the marginal commentary; section headings and words introducing quotes rubricated; other words rubricated and overlined for emphasis; notabilia (side-heads) such as المهمة and مطلب appear in red in stylized script.', 'Script: Naskh; clear Turkish or Persianate hand in a medium line; mainly serifless with slight effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, pointing often in conjoined dots, nūn tall with narrow bowl and point nearly assimilated; occasionally vocalized in black and red ink; same hand throughout except for marginal commentary in varying hands.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page; much marginal commentary.', 'Collation: 5 V (50), VI (62), 2 V (82), IV (90), 7 V (160), V+1 (171) ; chiefly quinions; catchwords present; foliated through 119 (foliation appears to have been lost with trimming of the following leaves) skipping initial leaf with table of contents page and incipt page; pagination in pencil added later, Western numerals; lacunae of fol. 62b, 65b, 87a, and 87b (inked foliation) marked بياض صحيح; other partial lacunae on fol. 68b and 71b unmarked.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم الكتاب بعون الله تع وقد فرغ من هذا الكتاب الشريف من تحريره عن يد عبد الضعيف المذنب المحتاج الى رحمة ربه اللطيف داود بن علي فقير افقر انام النخيف [?] في اواسط رجب المعظم المنيف من سنة اثنى و خمسين و تسعمائة بمداد الخفيف."', 'Explicit: "صورته مجوسي تزوج بنته...وهذا اخر ما قصدته والحمدلله وحده وما كان عزي بتأليفه ولا غرضي بتصنيفه إلا [...] ذكر عند مطالعة ناظريه وادعي بدعاء مخلص...فلما فرغت من الكتاب واعدضت على المشايخ اشاروا الي اذكر ملماكيلا يحرم الكتاب منهما فاجبتهم الى ذلك على سبيل الاختصار امتثالا لامرهم والحمدلله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: الحمدلله الذي اوضح السبيل للسالكين ونور بنوره الشاكرين وصلى الله على محمد خاتم النبيين وعلى آله واصحابه" الطاهرين وسلم تسليما كثيرا اما بعد فان القلوب مجبولة على ادخار الزاد ليوم المعاد..."', 'Title from text opening.', 'Ms. codex.', "al-Yanābīʻ, one of the many commentaries on the Mukhtaṣar, al-Qudūrī's compendium of law. No clear statement of authorship appears in the ms. and is perhaps disputed. A work of this title has been attributed to al-Shiblī in Ḥājjī Khalīfah with a caveat from Ibn Quṭlūbughā's Ṭabaqāt al-Ḥanafīyah indicating that al-Yanābīʻ was known to be the work of Rashīd al-Dīn Abī ʻAbd Allāh Maḥmūd ibn Ramaḍān al-Rūmī. As a result, manuscripts are attributed variously to both al-Rūmī and al-Shiblī."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 489', 'Origin: As appears in opening matter on p.8, composed in 949 [1542 or 3]. Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. suggest 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Two inventory cataloguing slips in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.1-4) -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.5-6).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 16a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in dull yellow paper ; upper and lower cover carry tooled diamond-shaped binding ornament, built up from a series of four-petaled flower shapes, along with tooled rule-border ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked endbands in red and yellow, in poor condition with significant losses ; overall in poor condition with significant staining and deposits (possible acid burn or fire damage), shrinkage, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of perhaps several types ; all with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks including three crescents (75 mm., perpendicular to chains, see p.16-17), anchor in circle (see p.76-77), and crown-star-crescent (see pp.114, 119) ; countermarks include "FB" (p.56), "MS" or "AS" [?] (p.122) and "GC" (p.136, with additional anchor in circle and three crescents marks, pp.130, 140, 144, etc., compare Heawood 4) ; all sturdy, well-sized and burnished, even glazed, some glossy.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas ; some overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Egyptian [?] hand in a medium to bold line ; virtually serifless (though occasional head-serif irregularly appears) with very slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in distinct dots (three dots represented by a curved stroke), alif maqṣūrah occasionally pointed as yāʼ, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf), adhering fairly closely to baseline ; glosses as well brief excerpts at opening and close (p.7 and pp.525-7) in a Mahgribī hand.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page.', 'Collation: 16 V(160), IV (168), 9 V(258), I (260), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and back flyleaf).', 'Explicit: "فيحتري له اهل الدين دون غيرهم جعلنا الله تعالى منهم بمنه وكرمه واجزل لنا من مدد سيدنا ونبينا محمد صلى الله عليه وسلم ... ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم والحمد لله اولا واخرا ظاهرا وباطنا وكفي وسلام على عباده الذين اصطفى وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم تسليما كثيرا تم وكمل"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام على سيدنا محمد خاتم النبيين والمرسلين وعلى اله واصحابه اجمعين وبعد فهذه عجالة علقتها على مشكل شمائل الامام الحافظ ابي عيسى محمد ابن عيسى بن سورة بفتح المهملة فسكون اصلها لغة الحدة الترمذي ... سنة تسع واربعين وتسعمائة بالمسجد الحرام المكي وسميتها اشرف الوسائل الى فهم الشمائل ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.7) and opening matter (preface) on p.8.", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine early copy of the commentary by Ibn Ḥajar al-Haytamī (d.1567) on al-Tirmidhī's (d.892) Shamāʼil, a collection of traditions comprising the Prophet’s characteristics. Brief excerpts at opening and close (p.7 and pp.525-7)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 302', 'Origin: As appears in colophon, copied by Sulṭān Ḥusayn ibn Jamshīd with transcription completed in Ramaḍān 953 [October-November 1546]. Mounting carried out much later ; paper with embossed mark suggests 19th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "186 T. D. M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" in pencil on recto of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Semi-limp boards faced in dull red leather with dark green leather over spine and edges / turn-ins (leather faced and edged framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in dull green-brown leather ; doublure hinges in same dark green leather ; upper and lower covers carry traces of stained blue border defining a central rectangular panel ; now sewn in cream thread over two cords (quite wide, not recessed, flexible sewing, apparent as ridges on spine), other sewing holes visible ; overall in fair condition with staining, abrasion, etc. ; framing may constitute a repair.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper ; written area later mounted in borders of tinted (in varying shades of blue, lavender, etc.) and gold-flecked wove paper with almond shaped embossed mark ("... SMYRNA [SMYRNA]" see fol.7, 9, etc. compare embossed mark in paper of Isl. Ms. 10, copied in Kharparūt [i.e. Harput, Kharberd / Kharpert, etc. now Elazığ] in 1853) ; some breakthrough at frames.', 'Decoration: Exquisite double-page illumination at opening consisting of large rectangular panels each divided to central rectangular panel carrying opening text set off by cloud-bands (in gold with delicate floral motifs in blue), flanking vertical panels filled with delicate arabesques in red, black, gold, lavender, yellow, etc. on fields of blue set in lozenges defined by narrow white bands, and upper and lower rectangular panels with gold lozenges carrying verses ("خوشتر از كتاب در جهان يارى نيست در غمكده زمانه غمخوارى نيست هر لحظه از او بگوشه تنهائى صد راحتى است هرگز آزادى نيست") in white surrounded by rich, swirling arabesques with floral accents in gold, white, pink, lavender, etc. on fields of gold and blue set off by looping bands in white ; elswhere throughout, written area surrounded by a gold frame with outermost blue rule ; section headings set off in splendid rectangular headpieces (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) carrying headings in white.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; exquisite hand in a thin to medium line ; serifless with effect of inclination to the right, words descending to baseline, elongation and slight contrast in thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 12 lines per page, mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: III (6), III-3 (9), III (15), 2 II(23) ; ternions and binions ; catchwords present.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "وقع الفارغ من كتابته فى شهر رمضان المبارك سنه ثلاث وخمسين وتسعمائة كتبه العبد سلطان حسين بن جمشيد "', 'Explicit: "بضاعت نیاوردم الا امید خدایا ز عفوم مکن نا امید"', 'Incipit: "بنام خداوند جان آفرین حکیم سخن در زبان آفرین خداوند بخشنده ی دستگیر کریم خطا بخش پوزش پذیر عزیزی که هر کز درش سر بتافت..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Exquisite copy of selections from the Būstān, the celebrated mas̲navī of Saʻdī (d.1292), renowned Persian poet and prose writer.'])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated.', 'Date and name of owner/copyist in colophon: tammat al-aḥkām ... wa-kāna al-farāgh min taʻlīq hādhihi al-nuskhah al-mubārakah yawm al-arbuʻāʾ al-mubārak thālith ʻasharī Rajab al-ghudw sanat 1183[?] [12 November 1769?] ʻalá yad mālikihi wa-nāsikhihi bi-yadihi al-fānitah al-faqīr ʻAbd Allāh ibn ʻAlī ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Ḥusaynī al-Mālikī al-Ṭahṭāwī ...[?]... sayyidī Abī al-Qāsim al-Ḥusaynī al-Ṭahṭā.', 'On the astrological significance of the appearance of Sirius.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 604', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.323, copied by Manṣūr al-ʻAṭṭār [?] with transcription completed 20 Rabī II 1034 [ca. 30 January 1625].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover "IL 270" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark blue cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Type III binding (without flap), approaching Western style (not flush with text block, etc.) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in brown wove paper ; upper and lower covers bear embossed emblems of the Ottoman Empire - upper cover, what appears to be the tuğra / ṭughrā of the sultan [Mahmut II ?] and lower cover, crescent and star ; resewn over cords in white thread, six stations ; overall in somewhat poor condition with spine leather lifting (printed waste used in spine lining and lower hinge), splitting and deteriorating, minor abrasion and staining of cloth, some spine slant (slightly cocked).', 'Support: European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), and anchor in circle with trefoil above watermark (see p.28, 29, etc.) ; dark cream in color, fairly crisp though sturdy, well-burnished to glossy (in vicinity of p.179 extremely smooth and glossy) ; some staining.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas or discs (occasionally in threes).', "Script: Naskh ; clear 'Syrian' or Egyptian [?] hand ; virtually serifless (though occasional rightward serifs appear on freestanding alif, lām, etc.) and quite rounded, pointing in distinct dots, curvilinear descenders, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf), partially vocalized.", 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page.', 'Collation: ii, V-1 (9), 15 V(159), II+1 (164), ii ; chiefly quinions ; quire numbering in the form of whole words in the upper outer corner of the opening recto of the second and third quire, thereafter in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals (red or black ink) ; catchwords present though often lost to trimming ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "على يد منصور العطار غفر له ولوالديه في عشرين ربيع الثاني من شهور سنة ۱۰۳۴"', 'Explicit: "فنثبت ان الذي طنوه [؟] حجة لهم فهو حجة لنا عليهم والله اعلم واعلم ان الفرض [في] تعيين المسائل وتعديدها لا يليق بهذا الكتاب ولما وصلنا الي هذا الموضع فلنقطع كلامنا وحامدين لله تعالى ومصليين على رسوله محمد المصطفى صلى الله عليه وسلم وعلى اله واصحابه وسلم تسليما كثيرا"', 'Incipit: "قال الشيخ الامام ... فخر الملة والدين ابو عبد الله محمد بن عمر الرازي برد الله مضجعه الحمد لله الذي لا خالق للاشياء الا هو ولا رازق للاحياء الا هو ... اما بعد فقد سألني جماعة من افاضل الاصحاب والكابر الانساب ان اصنف مختصرا ملخصا من فضائل الشافعي المطلبي رضي الله عنه وفي ترجيح مذهبه فصنفت هذا المختصر ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the well-known hagiographical work by Fakhr al-Dīn al-Rāzī (d.1210) on the life and merits of al-Imām Abū ʻAbd Allāh Muḥammad ibn Idrīs al-Shāfiʻī (d. 820), the eponym of the Shāfiʻī school (madhhab).'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Three crescents; initials W+W. For the first see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Contains star tables and astronomical diagrams.', 'Rubrication on first 5 pp. only; marginal corrections in another hand.', '"A treatise dealing mainly with astrology.... This work merits investigation." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 42.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 212', 'Origin: As appears at close on p.37, composed and or copied by Aḥmad ibn al-Maghribī. Date of transcription not indicated. Paper suggests 15th or 16th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "238 T...[?]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "136" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.9).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in textured paper (painted in shades of gold, red, orange, green, etc.) with red leather over spine and edges/turn-ins ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves (made endpapers) in shell marbled paper (blue and brown) ; upper and lower covers bear gold-painted border ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in light green and yellow, intact ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, etc.', "Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with chain lines grouped in threes, 9-11 mm. between the chains and 39-42 mm. between the groups, heavy and thick ; added leaves in European laid paper with 10-11 laid lines per cm., chain lines spaced 27 mm. apart, and watermarks including spread eagle with 'T S C' below, coat of arms with lion rampant guardant and crown above.", 'Decoration: Simple titlepiece on p.9 consisting of rectangular panel ruled in red carrying title, etc. in red and black ; headings and keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas (often three) or discs in red ; written area of incipit and facing page, as well as explicit and facing page, surrounded by red-rule border.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Egyptian or Syrian [?] hand ; virtually serifless, with many open counters, pointing in distinct dots, sweeping descenders, tapered rightward descenders, yāʼ of fī often mardūdah, kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred with even final kāf bearing shaqq, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ, etc. ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page (written area occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry) ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 2 I(4), V (14), III (20), 2 I(24), i ; several blank added leaves preceding and following text ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes added leaves).', 'Colophon: "وهذا ما انتهى الينا من وفات رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم وشرف وكرم وزاده شرفا وكرما وتعظيما اللهم اغفر لمالك هذا الكتاب وكاتبه وقارئه وسامعه ومن كتب من اجله ولوالديهم وامواتهم واموات المسلمين اجمعين اللهم صلى على محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين والحمد لله رب العالمين خدمة العبد الفقير الى الله تعالى احمد بن المغربي"', 'Explicit: "وكانت اول من لحق بالنبي صلى الله عليه وسلم من اهل بيته رضي الله عنها"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله المعروف بالكرم قبل وجود الوجود الموصوف بالكرم والفضل والجود والمنزه في وحدانيته عن الابناء والاباء والجدود ..."', 'Title from titlepiece on p.9.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of a work on the birth and death of the Prophet, perhaps compiled by Aḥmad ibn al-Maghribī. Added title on 'title page' would indicate this once accompanied another work."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 531', 'Origin: Composition finished ("faraghtu min jamʻih") in Muḥarram 667 [September 1268]. As appears in colophon on fol.153b, copying finished ("tamma al-kitāb...ʻalá yad") by ʻAbd al-Raḥīm ibn ʻAbd al-Karīm ibn Naṣr Allāh al-Jurmī Muḥtadā al-Shīrāzī, on the evening of Friday, the 21st of the month of repentance (shahr al-tawbah) [Ramaḍān], 769 [ca. 10 May 1368].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- c. Note in unidentified hand "[...]69 H [...] H/1368 second copy (there are two copies of this ms.)."', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in pink coated paper with brown leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding (though with tight back) ; upper and lower covers carry gold foil stamped floral design ; at some stage sewn over three recessed cords ; stuck on endbands in red and white stripe ; obviously modern binding, not original, separating from text block at spine, revealing a great deal of adhesive.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with roughly 8-9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, more distinct in some areas) and no chain lines distinctly visible, somewhat cloudy formation, quite sturdy, beige to light brown in color, well-burnished ; added title page on a machine laid paper.', 'Decoration: Section headings and words introducing quotes rubricated ; other words rubricated and overlined for emphasis ; three dots in red to mark text divisions.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Persianate hand in a narrow line ; partially seriffed with sharp leftward serifs on many ascenders (even free-standing alif), curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots (two dots occasionally oriented vertically), final kāf often appearing with shaqq, some sweeping descenders ; from fol.107a, ink changes from brown to black, line much thinner with hand slightly smaller though quite similar ; occasionally vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, I+1 (3), II+1 (8), III (14), VII (28), III (34), VI (46),10 V (146), V-3 (153), i ; chiefly quinions ; middle-of-the-quire marks appear in the form of oblique strokes in the upper corners of the right-hand leaves at the center of each quire ; catchwords present ; pagination added later in pencil, Western numerals.', 'Colophon: "Scribal", rectangular, reads: "تم الكتاب بعون الله تعالى وحسن توفيقه على يد العبد الضعيف المذنب المقصر اقل عباد الله تعالى واحوجهم الى رحمته عبد الرحيم بن عبد الكريم بن نصرالله الجرمي محتدا الشيرازي مولدا ومنشأ اصلح الله احواله في الدارين وغفر له ولوالديه ولاحبائه وسائر من احسن اليهم وجميع المسلمين انه هو الغفور الرحيم في ليلة الجمعة الحادي والعشرين من شهر التوبة سنة تسع وستين وسبعمائة والحمد لله رب العالمين اكمل الحمد على كل حال والصلوة والسلام على خير خلقه محمد واله واصحابه خير صحب وال"', 'Explicit: "هذا اخرما قصدته من هذا الكتاب وقد من الله الكريم فيه بما هوله اهل من الفوائد النفيسة والدقائق اللطيفة من نواع العلوم ومهماتها ومستحدات الحقائق ومطلوبها...اخر الكتاب قال مصنفه الشيخ الامام العالم الفاضل ابو زكريا محيي بن شرف النواوي رضي الله عنه فرغت من جمعه في المحرم سنة سبع وستين وستمائة سوى احرف الحقتها بعد ذلك واجزت روايته لجميع المسلمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الواحد القهار العزيز الغفار مقدر الاقدار مصرف الامور مكور الليل على النهار تبصره لاولي [?] القلوب والابصار الذي ايقظ من خلقه من اصطفاه فادخله في جملة الاخيار...اما بعد فقد قال الله العظيم العزيز الحكيم فاذكروني اذكركم..."', 'Title from added title page (fol.1a).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Also known as Kitāb al-Adhkār, on prayers for day and night handed down by tradition, in 361 bābs or chapters. A lengthy table of contents precedes the work, and many reading notes and marginal comments are found throughout.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 50', "Origin: As appears in 'colophon' on p.796, transcription for this ms. completed in 1072 [1661 or 1662]. Further detail on copyist and place of transcription not provided.", 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 2. Ghunyat al-mutamalli."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (in blue, seafoam green, yellow, white) with red leather over spine, fore-edge flap and turn-ins ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in yellow laid paper ; sewn in brown or grey thread, two stations ; only traces of endbands remaining ; in poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, cracking and lifting of leather, fore-edge flap detaching, etc.', 'Support: Primarily a European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced roughly 28 mm. apart ; well-burnished ; watermark of anchor in circle with trefoil above (compare Heawood 4) ; a different European paper, much thinner with three circles watermark is used toward the center of the codex.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and some notabilia (side heads) rubricated ; text being commented upon overlined in red ; textual divders in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand ; partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on many vertical strokes, even free-standing alif ; effect of tilt to the left ; quite rounded, with some sweeping descenders ; many open counters ; point of final nūn often assimilated with bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board clearly evident).', 'Collation: i, IV-3 (5), V+1 (16), 36 V(376), V+1 (387), IV-1 (394), i ; chiefly quinions ; final leaf left blank ; quire numbering in the form of whole words ("الجزء الثاني", etc.) and Hindu-Arabic numerals appears in the upper outer margin of the recto of the first leaf of each quire beginning with the second ; and foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, begins with ١ on page facing incipit page ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between pp.631-632, skips from p.655 to p.666, includes some flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم تم تم تم تم تم تم تم سنة اثنى وسبعين بعد الالف"', 'Explicit: "لان يلقي الله تعالى ومهرها في ذمتها خير له من ان يطأ امرأة لا تصلي قال الله تعالى وامر اهلك بالصلوة واصطبر عليها لا نسألك رزقا نحن نرزقك والعقابة للتقوى ونسأل الله تعالى حسن العقابة والعفية في الدنيا والاخرة لنا ولاخواننا وجميع المسلمين انه خير المسؤول واكرم مأمول امين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله جاعل الصلوة عماد الدين وعتاد المتقين وسراج اليقين ومنهاج المهدين ... وبعد فان العبادات ولي ما صرفت فيه نفائس الاوقات ... وكان الكتاب المسمى بمنية المصلي وغنية المبتدي من احسن ما صنعت في بيانها ... واحببت ان اضع له شرحا يكثر فوائدها ... وسميته غنية المتملي في شرح منية المصلي ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.15).", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of al-Ḥalabī's exhaustive commentary on the Munyat al-muṣallī by Sadīd al-Dīn Kashgharī, addressing matters of ablution and ritual prayer. Added leaves carrying table of contents inserted after front flyleaf."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 570', 'Origin: As appears in colophpon on fol.191a (p. 381) copied by Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Sayyār [?] but date and place of copying are not specified.', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From spine label and inscription on interior of upper cover, "IL 70" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in European laid paper with brown leather (goatskin) along edges/turn-ins, spine, and foreedge flap; Type II binding (with flap) ; interior of envelope flap and foreedge flap in same brown leather ; appears to date from the time of the page replacements and inserted table of contents, i.e. likely the late 17th century ; in fair condition, though the upper cover is beginning to detach, lower endband has suffered some damage exposing core and primaries, hinge of the upper cover is splitting, quires after the first are rather tightly bound, and linings of upper and lower covers show leather burn from the turn-ins and hinge ; codex is severly cocked (spine slant).', 'Support: non-European laid paper (Possibly post-1350 14th century Syro-Egyptian, see Loveday p. 83), somewhat thick and soft almost to the point of flocculence ; laid and chain lines are very difficult to discern ; laid lines run horizontally and are set closely together ; chain lines are occasionally visible, in once case what appears to be a set of 3 chainlines 11-12 mm. apart and a set of 2 chainlines 14-15 mm. apart, with the two sets roughly 22 mm. apart ; a European paper is used for the replaced leaves and for the added ternion at the beginning of the codex (carrying the table of contents) with vertical chain lines roughly 26-27 mm. apart and bearing a watermark of paschal lamb enclosed in a four-lobed circle, approx. 50 x 50 mm., similar but far from identical to Heawood 2840 (Verona, 1678), Piccard inv. J 340/no. 86801 (Innsbruck, 1625), and Piccard inv. J 340/no. 86802 (Venice, 1662) ; likely late 17th c. Italian (of special interest for dating the cover given that these repairs and additions seem to have been done when the cover was installed) ; some interesting reinforcements/page repairs done using waste from another old manuscript (see fol. 21a/p. 41).', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with overlining referring to the glosses in red ; an iron-gall ink, now significantly browned, was used until fol. 145a (p. 289), where the scribe switched to a carbon-based ink which is still quite black ; figure accompanying the text appears in the margin of fol. 125b (p. 250).', 'Script: Naskh ; same Syro-Egyptian hand throughout (including the vast majority of the gloss and with the exception of the replaced leaves) with tapering, non-serifed alifs and a mix of open and closed counters (tending towards open) ; both the lām alif al-mukhaffafah and al-warrāqīyah are used and kāf mabsūṭah is sometimes used ; fully pointed and occasionally vocallized.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV+III (14), 16 IV(142), III(148), 5 IV(188), I+1 (191), i ; chiefly quaternions ; anomalous first quire is a quaternion into which a ternion has been sewn after the first leaf ; fol.8 and fol.191 are replacements on a different paper and in a different hand ; foliation in Hindu-Arabic numerals beginning at fol.9, added later and occasionally suppolied in red ink over the marginal gloss (seefol.186a / p.371) ; catchwords occasionally present with many likely lost to trimming ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied and referenced in cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "وقد تم هذا الكتاب الخطير الشهير بالجامع الصغير بعناية الملك القدير على يدي اضعف عباده تعالى واحوجهم اليه تعالى وافقرهم الى مغفرة الله تعالى محمد بن عبد الرحمن بن سيار [؟] غفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه تم تم تم"', 'Explicit: "فكذلك ما شرع لاجله الا ان المسلمين في سعة حتى يحتاج اليهم لانه فرض كفاية يتادى بالبعض ولالن المقصود اذا حصل بالبعض لم يبق فرضا لعدمه حتى يحتاج اليهم وذلك ان يعم النفير لان المقصود ههنا لا يحصل ببعضهم فيصير من فروض الاعيان والله اعلم واحكم"', 'Incipit: "رب يسر ولا تعسر الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على خير خلقه محمد واله وصحبه الطيبين الطاهرين اجمعين قال الشيخ الامام الاجل حسام الدين عمر بن عبد العزيز البخاري اما بعد فان مشايخنا رحمهم الله يعظمون هذا الكتاب تعظيما ويقدمون على سائر الكتاب تقديما..."', 'Title from inscription on fol.1a (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', "Ḥusām al-Dīn ʻUmar ibn ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz al-Ṣadr al-Shahīd al-Bukhārī's revision and explanation of al-Jāmiʻ al-ṣaghīr attributed to Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥasan al-Shaybānī (d.189/804), a work of Ḥanafī fiqh representing the legal opinions developed by and around Abū Ḥanīfah. Initial and final leaves replaced and supplied in a later hand, along with a table of contents. Extensive gloss in same hand as main text. Description provided by Noah Gardiner."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 18', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.641, the bulk of the text copied by Muṣṭafá ibn Muḥammad who also endowed the manuscript for his sons (see waqf statement on insert p.14). Transcription completed ("tammat al-kitāb...") in Erzurum, the Aḥmadīyah madrasah, in Shaʻbān 1101 [May or June 1690].', 'Accompanying materials: Several inserts carrying glosses, etc. most of them tipped in (paginated pp.13-14 [carries waqf statement], pp.19-20, pp.21-22, pp.25-26, pp.35-36, pp.39-40, etc.).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 136. Commentary on al-Jami al-saghir."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather (goat?) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings (and interior of flap) in yellow paper ; upper and lower covers bear blind-stamped scalloped mandorla and pendants with blind-tooled accents ; design continues on envelope flap, mandorla/rosette with vegetal design (compare Déroche OSd 8) ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations ; fine chevron endbands in red and white ; in poor condition with much abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, delamination of boards, slight spine slant (cocked), etc.', "Support: European laid paper of at least two types ; opening section on a thick, worn paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines (horizontal) evenly spaced, though difficult to measure ; majority of text on thinner, well-burnished paper with roughly 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 24-28 mm. apart ; burnishers' marks visible ; quite smooth ; watermarks include crown with band of initials and grapes as well as tre lune.", 'Decoration: Text rubricated with keywords ("حدثنا", "باب", etc.), section headings, overlining, etc. in red.', 'Script: Two distinct hands ; first hand a naskh-nastaʻlīq, virtually serifless with effect of descent to baseline ; second hand a bold Turkish hand with mainly closed counters, compact and adhering to baseline, though occasional superscripting of words, and pointing in line or inverted caret rather than two distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 10-13 lines per page (opening section in 10-11 ; remainder in 13) ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: III (6), 30 V (306) ; chiefly quinions ; ternion inserted before the opening of the text proper (likely by copyist who supplied the bulk of the ms.) carries table of contents with a few leaves left blank ; last word (overlined) of final line on each verso repeated at beginning of top line on recto of following leaf ; foliation in Hindu-Arabic numerals begins with ۱ on first folio of text proper (skips leaf between ۱۲ and ۱۳ and elsewhere) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts, added leaves at opening carrying table of contents, skips from 409 to 420, from 525 to 530 and from 575 to 580).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب على اضعف الطلاب حقير الفقير المحتاج الى رحمة الله تعالى مصطفى بن محمد عفي عنهما وغفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه في بلدة ارضروم في مدرسة احمدية في شهر شعبان المبارك في يوم الاحد في وقت الظهر سنة احدى ومائة بعد الف من هجرة النبي عليه السلام الحمد لله تم الكلام تم تم"', 'Explicit: "ولان المقصود اذا حصل بالبعض لم يبق فرضا لعدمه حتى يحتاج اليهم وذلك ان يعم النفير لان المقصود ههنا لا يحصل ببعضهم فيصير من فرض [كذا] الاعيان الحمد لله على التمام وللرسول بحق محمد واله افضل السلام باحسن الكلام"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على رسوله محمد واله وصحبه الطيبين الطاهرين اجمعين قال الشيخ الامام الاجل حسام الدين عمر بن عبد العزيز البخاري رحمة الله عليه اما بعد فان مشايخنا كانوا يعظمون هذا الكتاب تعظيما ويقدمونه على سائر الكتب تقديما ..."', 'Title from inscription on p.15.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the reworking and elucidation of al-Shaybānī's al-Jāmiʻ al-ṣaghīr, a work on Ḥanafī fiqh."])

en: (count: ['Watermark: serpent (?) in circle with cross (on flyleaf only).', 'Text rubricated in red and blue and enclosed within borders of red, black, blue and gold; chapter headings in gold ink; title p. (p. 7) illuminated; p. [8] has ʻunwān and gold rosettes marking ends of phrases; marginal corrections and notes in hand of copyist; vol. has gilt edges and edge title; table of contents supplied (pp. [3-6]).', 'Text (not this copy) published.', 'Date in colophon: wa-kāna al-farāgh min katb hādhā al-kitāb al-mubārak nahār al-ithnay ʻāshar shahr al-Ḥijjah al-ḥarām ākhir ʻām wāḥida baʻda al-alf [i.e. 10 September 1593].', 'An important work of Ḥanafī law deriving from the Hidāyah of ʻAlī ibn Abī Bakr al-Marghīnānī (d. 1196 or 7).', '"A compendium of Ḥanafī law." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 615', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.50, transcription completed Rabīʻ II 1008 [November 1599].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From lower cover label and spine label, "IL 305" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Thin boards covered in pieced coated paper (dark pink/mauve and white, mottled with sponge painted or faux marbled look) with dark blue cloth over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted paper ; sewn in light pink thread, two stations ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion ; textblock likely never attached to cover, which is quite ill-fitting and serves as a wrapper.', 'Support: European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (horizontal), anchor in circle with leaf above watermark (see p.2, 40, etc.) and "T B" under trefoil countermark (see p.36, etc.).', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated.', "Script: Naskh ; angular 'Syrian' or Turkish hand in a narrow line ; virtually serifless with many closed counters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, rounded, kāf mashqūqah preferred, etc.", 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 2 V(20), III (26), I (28) ; two quinions, ternion and single bifolium ; final three leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تم كتاب كفاية المتحفظ في اللغة في اواخر شهر ربيع الثاني من شهور سنة ثمان بعد الالف من الهجرة النبوية"', 'Explicit: "والذبالة الفتيلة وجمعها ذبال وهي الشعيلة ايضا وجمعها شعائل والله اعلم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين وصلى الله على محمد خاتم النبيين وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين هذا كتاب مختصر في اللغة وما يحتاج اليه من غريب الكلام اودعناه كثيرا من الاسماء والصفات وجنبناه وحشي الالفاظ واللغات ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.1) and colophon (p.50).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the popular lexicographical compendium by the Arab philologist Ibn al-Ajdābī (Abū Isḥāq Ibrāhīm ibn Ismāʻīl ibn Aḥmad ibn ʻAbd Allāh al-Ṭarābulusī, d.before 1203? or 1257?).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 379', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.1391, copied by Muḥammad ibn Khalīl (Mehmet b. Halil) ; date of transcription not specified ; paper suggests 18th century (perhaps mid century).', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip of wove paper with notes in black ink (between pp.230-321) -- b. Slip of laid paper with notes in black ink (between pp.726-727).', 'Former shelfmark: "340 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of opening leaf (p.2) ; "٣٢ع | ٤خ" on spine label.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in gold-flecked red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped (with orange paper onlay) and gold-painted mandorla filled with vegetal composition (compare Déroche class. NA 4), surrounded by a tooled border consisting of an s-shape stamped chain in gold flanked by thin gold fillets ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; worked endbands in pink and yellow thread in a chevron pattern ; overall in fair condition with fore edge flap lost, repairs to spine and fore edge of lower board in a darker red leather, and abrasion on upper and lower covers.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; one opening type with roughly 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines (horizontal) spaced roughly 12 mm. apart, and watermark of grapes surmounted by a crown (see p.32) ; another with roughly 13 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines (horizontal) spaced roughly 25 mm. apart, and watermark of "?AHE?NE" and figure (see p.46) ; another with roughly 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines (horizontal) spaced roughly 25 mm. apart, and watermark of grapes surmounted by a crown with a heart motif (see p.136) ; another with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines (horizontal) spaced roughly 21 mm. apart, watermark of grapes (see p.578) ; another with roughly 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines (horizontal) spaced roughly 24 mm. apart, and watermark of LANGUEDOC (see p.592) ; all well-burnished, thin and crisp.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.10 consisting of rectangular piece with emtpy gold cartouche outlined in orange and flanked by floral vegetal accents in gold, light pink, and pale blue, surmounted by a scalloped semicircular piece (dome) outlined in orange and filled with floral vegetal accents in blue, pale blue, light pink, orange, and white, itself surmounted by delicate vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue, and set in a well consisting of a thick band of light pink ; written area throughout surrounded by a thick gold frame with outer black rule ; Qurʼānic passages rubricated in a range of red shades ; overlining in red ink.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Ottoman hand in a medium to bold line ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: II (4), 169 V (694), II (698) ; chiefly quinions ; final two leaves (following close of text) left blank ; foliation in Hindu-Arabic numerals ; oblique catchwords on the verso of each leaf ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "كتبه اضعف العباد محمد بن حليل م"', 'Explicit: "ومراه يي ضلعه تشبيه بيورديلر صلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله و صحبه اجمعين و الحمد الله حمدا يوافي نعمه ويكافي مزيده كلما حمده الحامدون و ذكره الذاكرون تمت بعون الحق"', 'Incipit: "ان احسن الاحاديث بعد الحمد لمن جعل السقف الاخضر مرفوعا ... وبعد بو كمينۀ كم بضاعه وفقير قصير الباعه ... لمؤلفه احمدم ... واقوم الوسائل في ترجمة الشمائل ديو نام زد قيلدم ... "', 'Title from opening matter on p.14.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the extensive Ottoman Turkish rendering (with commentary) by İshak Hocası Ahmet b. Heyreddin (d.1708) of al-Tirmidhī’s (d.892) Kitāb al-Shamāʼil, a collection of traditions comprising the Prophet’s characteristics. Descriptive contributions from Nick Krabbenhoeft.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 299', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.321, copied by Bābā Shāh ibn Sulṭān ʻAlī (بابا شاه بن سلطان علی) with transcription completed in Shaʻbān 989 [September 1581].', 'Former shelfmark: "594 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in magenta surface-dyed and gold-flecked European paper upper and lower covers gold-painted in mitred-panel style, with large floral vegetal designs filling central rectangle and guilloché roll border around the perimeter ; sewn in red thread, two stations, some leaves loose ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, fairly good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion and lifting of leather.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper of perhaps two types ; written area with roughly 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical, quite indistinct) and faint chain lines irregularly visible, sturdy, well-burnished, dark cream to beige in color ; written area mounted in leaves tinted deep blue with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct) and faint chain lines irregularly visible, sturdy though fairly transluscent, well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2, consisting of rectangular piece with rubricated title in gold cartouche flanked by scalloped pieces in gold and red on field of lapis lazuli (with effect of book cover design) overlaid with delicated, swirling vegetal decoration in gold with floral accents in red, pink, yellow, lavender, and blue, bordered in bands of gold, pistachio green / turquoise and white and surmounted by scalloped dome in gold and lapis with similar vegetal decoration, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in white ; illuminated marginal decoration in saz leaves and floral forms completes illuminated double-page opening (pp.2-3) ; written area throughout delicately gold flecked and bordered in frame of gold, pistachio, red and white bands with columns within defined by narrow gold bands flanked by black fillets ; written area mounted in leaves tinted deep blue ; headings rubricated, chrysographed or in blue ink ; illustrated with five paintings (see p.67, 114, 150, 176, 298).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; exquisite calligraphic hand in a delicate line ; characteristically serifless with effect of words gently descending to baseline, elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in distinct dots, bowl of nūn wide with dot set just down within.', 'Layout: Written in 12 lines per page with written area divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 5 IV (40), II (44), III+1 (51), 8 IV (115), III+1 (122), 4 IV (154), IV-1 (161), ii ; chiefly quaternions ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," mainly Arabic, reads "فرغت من تحرير هذه الكتاب الشريف فى تاريخ شهر شعبان سنه تسع وثمانين وتسعمايه حرره العبد بابا شاه بن سلطان علي غفر الله ذنوبه وستر عيوبه', 'Explicit: "بضاعت نیاوردم الا امید خدایا ز عفوم مکن نا امید"', 'Incipit: "بنام خداوند جان آفرین حکیم سخن در زبان آفرین ..."', 'Title from illuminated headpiece at opening on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Exquisite copy of the Būstān, the celebrated mas̲navī of Saʻdī (d.1292), renowned Persian poet and prose writer. Apparently attributed in the colophon to the calligrapher Bābā Shāh Isfahānī (d.1587 or 8). Illustrated with five miniatures. Contributions to the cataloguing from Elizabeth Kunze.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1029', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; hand, paper, etc. would suggest late 16th or early 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Slip with notes in hand of Jameson [?] in pencil and red ink "MAKDISI – II | Laṭāʼif al-Matn | Keep this slip with book. 116 leaves | 21 1/2 cm."', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 178', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, now lost) ; board linings in pink-tinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition reminiscent of Déroche. class. OAi2) and border in a series of blind rules ; sewn in cream thread, two stations, mainly broken, nearly all bifolia loose ; overall in poor condition with flap lost, significant pest damage, some abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, upper cover detaching, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of at least two types ; one type with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 29 mm. apart (horizontal), and anchor in circle watermark with leaf above (see pp.3-4, 88-89, etc., roughly 70 mm. tall, compare no.125, etc. in Nikolaev, Watermarks of the Ottoman Empire, v.1) ; another type with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-27 mm. apart and anchor in circle watermark with trevoil above (60 mm. tall, see pp.28-29) ; countermarks include "Vd" (p.48) and "PS" (p.188) ; severe pest damage.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Egyptian hand in a medium line ; serifless with very slight effect of tilt to the left, pointing in distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah often pointed as yāʼ, the lām alif al-warrāqīyah used extensively, partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 11 V (110), III (116) ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in pencil, Western numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between pp.15-16).', 'Explicit: "كذاك جميع من واليت فيكم ووالاني باجزال النصيب نجز الكتاب المبارك بحمد الله حق حمده وصلواته على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم "', 'Incipit: "قال الشيخ الامام العالم العامل ... تاج الدين ابو العباس احمد بن الشيخ الامام العالم العامل مفتي المسلمين فخر الدين ابي بكر محمد بن الشيخ الفقيه الامام العالم العامل مفتي المسلمين رشيد الدين عبد الكريم بن عطا الله الاسكندري ... الحمد لله الذي فتح لاوليائه باب محبته وانشط نفوسهم من عقال القطعة ... اما بعد فاني قصدت في هذا الكتاب ان اذكر جملا من فضائل سيدنا ومولانا الامام قطب العارفين ... شهاب الدين ابو العباس احمد بن عمر الانصاري المرسي ... واذكر شيخه الذي اخذ عنه ومنازلاته التي نقلت عنه او سمعتها منه وكراماته وعلومه واسراره ومعاملاته مع الله سبحانه ... وما نقله عن شيخه الشيخ ابي الحسن الشاذلي ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the treatise in ten bābs and a khātimah (comprised of al-Lāmiʻah al-munīrah wa-al-durrah al-khaṭīrah, al-Waṣīyah al-maktūb bihā ilá ikhwāninā bi-al-Iskandarīyah, and al-Qaṣīdah) on the lives and spiritual teachings of al-Shaykh Abū al-ʻAbbās al-Mursī (d.1287) and his shaykh, the founding shaykh of the Shādhilī ṭarīqah, Abū al-Ḥasan al-Shādhilī (d. 1258).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 66', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.375, copied by Pīr Muḥammad ibn ʻAlī al-Kalībūlī (Pir Mehmet b. Ali el-Gelibolî / Gelibolulu). Transcription completed ("waqaʻa al-farāgh min taḥrīr hādhā al-kitāb...") toward the end of Ramaḍān 1019 [December 1610].', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 43. Lisan al-hukkam." ; on tail edge of textblock "١٠٧".', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in block-printed decorated paper over marbled paper, with spine in red leather ; Type III binding (without flap, though may have had flap prior to installation on this textblock) ; board linings in laid paper ; sewn in gray thread, mainly two stations, occasionally four ; primaries in yellow ; chevron endbands in red and yellow, fair condition ; in poor condition with much abrasion, lifting of paper and leather, delaminating of boards, minor pest damage, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; mainly with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 26-28 mm. apart (horizontal), anchor in circle watermark (compare Heawood 2), burnished and fairly thick ; back flyleaves in thinner laid paper with crossbow in circle (trefoil above) watermark ; much staining.', "Decoration: Section headings, notabilia (side-heads) and 'two teeth stroke' ligature rubricated ; occasional textual divders in the form of inverted commas and overlining in red.", 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand ; virtually serifless, though occasional head-serif appears ; many closed counters ; effect of tilt to the left (more pronounced in some sections).', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V+1 (11), 18 V(191), iv ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (begins with ٢ on page facing incipit page, mistakenly repeats ١٢١ twice) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during digitization, includes flyleaves and mistakenly skips two pages each between pp.155-156, pp.201-202, pp.299-300, and pp.335-336).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "وقع الفراغ من تحرير هذا الكتاب في اواخر شهر رمضان المبارك من شهور سنة تسع عشرة والف من الهجرة المحمدية عليه افضل الصلوة والتحية على يد كاتبه الفقير پير محمد بن علي الكليبولي غفر الله له ولوالديه ولاستاذه ولمن طالع فيه ودعا لكاتبه بالمغفرة ولجميع المؤمنين اجمعين برحمتك يا ارحم الراحمين"', 'Explicit: " وطلب كافر من مسلم ان يعلمه القرآن والفقه فلا بأس به رجاء ان يطلع على محاسنه فيسلم كذا ذكر في التحفة والله الموفق الى سبيل الرشاد"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله العادل في حكمه القاضي بين عباده بعلمه احمده على ما حكم وقضى واشكره على ما ابرم وامضى ... وبعد فلما ابتليت بالقضاء وجرى الاحكم ومضى احببت ان اجمع مختصرا في الاحكام منتخبا من كتب سادتنا العلماء الاعلام ... ليكون عونا للحكام على فصل القضايا والاحكام ورتبته على ثلاثين فصلا ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.5).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Neat copy of the first part of this legal treatise (through chapter 21, Faṣl fī al-karāhīyah) completed by the author before his death. Table of contents included (see pp.3-4).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 81', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon but paper and hand would suggest late 14th or 15th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Slip of heavy European laid paper with excerpts in black ink inserted after p.16 (paginated p.17-18).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 86. Commentary on Majma al-bahrain."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (in several shades of blue, pink, yellow, white, etc., now faded or even lost from upper and lower covers, best visible on envelope flap) with dark red brown leather over spine, fore-edge flap, and edges/turn-ins ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in yellow-tinted laid paper ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked endbands in light blue and yellow ; in poor condition with much abrasion, staining, lifting and cracking of leather, moisture damage, pest damage, warping of flap, etc.', 'Support: non-European (Arab) laid paper with 7-8 laid horizontal lines per cm., some sagging and curving ; vertical chain lines appear grouped in threes with 9-11 mm. between the chains and roughly 48 mm. between the groups ; quite thick and lightly burnished ; some ink burn.', 'Decoration: Text partially rubricated with section headings, sigla, overlining, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; supplied in two main hands, with marginalia and final matter in several additional hands ; opens in an elegant Persian (?) hand, more of a naskh-nastaʻlīq, essentially serifless, effect of words descending to baseline, letterforms reminiscent of nastaʻlīq ; at fol.17a (p.35) hand changes to neat Turkish or Persian hand (?), essentially serifless, mainly closed counters, some assimilation of letters such as rāʼ with final hāʼ, very slight effect of slant to the left ; line thickness and ink varies in certain sections ; headings provided in larger script approaching tawqīʻ.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: III (6), V (16), 15 IV(136), III (142) ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present for every folio of first two quires, thereafter appear only on final folio of each quire ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, recto of each leaf (begins with ٢ on fol.2/p.3, mistakenly repeats ۹۷, and ends at ۱۳٥ rather than continuing to the end) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly skips two pages between pp.171-172, includes insert).', 'Explicit: "ثم قسم الباقي على سهام من بقي منهم والله اعلم بالصواب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله جاعل العلماء انجما للاهتداء زاهرة واعلاما للاقتداء طاهرة ... اما بعد فهذا كتاب يصغر للحفاظ حجمه ... وهذا مجمع البحرين وهما النيران المشرقان وهذا ملتقى النيرين وهما احدهما يهدي الى فقه المذهب الذي هو من اشرف المطالب والاخر يعرف الخلاف بين المذاهب ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' fol.1a (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Neat copy of Muẓaffar al-Dīn Aḥmad ibn ʻAlī Ibn al-Sāʻātī's compendium on Ḥanafī law, based on the Mukhtaṣar of al-Qudūrī (d. 428/1037) and the Manẓūmah of al-Nasafī (d. 537/1142)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 601', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.44, copied by Aḥmad ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥīm [?] ibn ʻAbd Allāh ibn Faḍl Allāh al-Jawādī al-Shāfiʻī with transcription completed ("wa-kāna al-farāgh minhu...") 14 Shaʻbān 836 [ca. 5 April 1433].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From recto of opening leaf (p.1) "IL 363" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Unbound ; sewing stations evident but no threads remaining ; traces of envelope flap on opening (outermost) leaf ; housed in heavy wrapper for protection.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 20 laid lines (horizontal) in 16 mm. and chain lines (vertical) arranged in groups, a set of 4 and two sets of 3 with 7-9 mm. between the chain lines, 36 mm between the set of 4 and first set of 3 and 52 mm between the sets of 3 ; burnished.', "Script: Naskh ; Mamlūk-era 'Syrian' or Egyptian hand ; virtually sans serif, with alifs tapering at the bottom, mainly closed counters are mostly closed , somewhat informal but quite readable ; occasionally fully pointed and vocalized (mostly ḥadīth excerpts) and elswehere neither pointed nor vocalized.", 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled (misṭarah used).', 'Collation: IV+1 (9), IV+1 (18), II (22) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "وكان الفراغ منه صبيحة يوم السبت رابع عشر شعبان المبارك من شهور سنة ست وثلثين وثمانمائة احسن الله خاتمها ... على يد اضعف خلق الله تعالى واحوجهم الى عفوه وكرمه احمد بن عبد الرحيم بن عبد الله بن فضل الله الجوادي الشافعي ..."', 'Explicit: "قلت ما تقول في موطا مالك بن انس قال اكتبوه وهذا اخر ماردناه [ما اردناه] من مناقب الامام الشاعفي على ما ذكره الحافظ ابو عبد الله الذهبي وجميع ما ذكره هو وزدنا عليه شئيا يسيرا بالنسبة الى ما ذكر في منافيه والى ما ذكر من محاسنه ومناقبه في التواريخ كتاريخ ابي القاسم بن عساكر وابي بكر الخطيب ... وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله واصحابه وعترته اجمعين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين واشهد ان لا اله الا الله الملك الحق المبين ... اما بعد فهذا كتاب اذكر فيه ترجمة الامام ابي عبد الله محمد بن ادريس الشافعي ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the biographical work by Abū Bakr ibn Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn ʻUmar ibn Muḥammad ibn Qāḍī Shuhbah al-Shāfiʻī (d.1448) drawn from the work of al-Dhahabī, Ibn ʻAsākir, etc. on the life of al-Imām Abū ʻAbd Allāh Muḥammad ibn Idrīs al-Shāfiʻī (d. 820), the eponym of the Shāfiʻī school (madhhab). Description provided by Noah Gardiner.'])

en: (count: ['Origin: Lacks dated colophon, though paper would suggest late 13th (final decade) or 14th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. -- c. Slip with notes in German (following p.68), including general description of the codex and claiming that, from the 24 maqāmah onwards, the text includes an otherwise unknown commentary written by al-Ḥarīrī himself ; N. Gardiner believes this refers to the three sections marked تفسير, the first of which appears immediately following the 24 maqāmah ; these texts do in fact appear in the printed edition.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 353" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip) ; from red-bordered label on upper cover, "۱٦".', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in European laid paper (over stamped scalloped mandorla) with spine and edges/turn-ins in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now missing) ; board-linings in European laid paper (tre lune watermark visible) ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations, primaries in red ; in poor condition with much staining and abrasion with significant losses to covers ; spine is damaged at the head and tail ; endbands are entirely gone ; most threads are broken and the majority of the leaves are loose ; many of the bifolia have split ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (Arab) laid paper with 20 laid lines in 32 mm. or 6 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) ; chain lines are difficult to distinguish but a set of 3 with 15-16 mm. between lines can be seen ; replacement folia in another Oriental laid paper, but with lines too indistinct to measure ; some pest damage to some leaves, though not so badly as to obscure text ; edges of a number of leaves are badly damaged.', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with section headings (for each maqāmah, occasional sections of tafsīr) in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; a few graceful Syrian and or Egyptian hands ; primary hand is a highly readable naskh, probably Egyptian, plainly very old (13th-14th century), fully pointed and vowelled, with shaddah, hamzah, etc. ; hands of the replacement folia at the beginning and end of the textblock another very nice naskh, probably Egyptian and no later than 16th century, fully pointed and mostly vowelled, with shaddah, hamzah, etc. ; replacement folia from p.21-24 in a distinct hand, larger, more extended in the horizontal, likewise fully pointed and vowelled.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; single column divided to set off poetry ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, IV (8), I (10), V-1 (19), 2 V(39), V-1 (48), V (58), V-1 (67), 2 V(87), IV (95), 2 III(107), I (109), V (119), V-3 (126), I (128), VII (142), V (152), ii ; chiefly quinions ; leaves appear to be missing from the quires 13, 14, 17 and 18 ; catchwords lacking ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and insert).', 'Explicit: "ويحظي بالعفو انه هو اهل التقوي واهل المغفرة وولي الخيرات في الدنيا والآخرة. هذا اخر المقامات التي انشأتها بالاغترار ... والحمد لله على نعمائه والصلوة والسلام على خير انبيائه ومبلغ انبائه وعلى آله وصحبه واوليائه تم الكتاب بحمد وحسن توفيقه قابلته فصححته الا ما زاغ عنه البصر. ويتلو المقامات رسالتان ايضا على التزام حرف السين والشين في كل كلمة ... ويشرح ويشدخ بمشيته الشديد البطش الشامخ العرش وتشريفه لبشير البشر والشفيع المشفع في المحشر تمت والحمد لله وحده"', 'Incipit: "قال الشيخ الرئيس ابو محمد القاسم بن علي بن محمد بن عثمان الحريري البصري رضى الله عنه اللهم انا نحمدك على ما علمت من البيان والهمت من التبيان كما نحمدك على ما اسبغت من العطاء واسبلت من الغطاء ونعوذ بك من شرة اللسن وفضول الهذر ..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of al-Ḥarīrī's celebrated Maqāmāt or Sessions modeled after those of al-Hamadhānī, accompanied by brief commentary and followed by two brief epistles (even maqāmahs) in which the letters sīn and shīn appear in every word of the respective passage. Description provided by Noah Gardiner."])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Andrea Galvani of Pordenone (f. 1 only). See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 36 and no. 860.', 'Contains astronomical and mathematical tables and geometric diagrams.', 'Text rubricated; marginal corrections and notes in hand of copyist and others; some pp. missing, f. 1 supplied in different paper in different hand.', '"Extended commentary with some tables" on author\'s Qalāʾid al-laʾālī fī ʻamal al-ayyām wa-al-layālī, "a poem on timekeeping in unnumbered faṣls." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 104.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 6', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper would suggest late 15th century or 16th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Slip in wove paper with inventory cataloguing notes in pencil (paginated pp.1-2).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 6. Matali al-anzar." ; on front flyleaf (p.3) in black ink "۱۲".', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stooled mandorla filled with geometric interlace and having border and pendants, along with border formed of s-shaped stamps and cornerpiece designs in a crescent-shaped stamp ; design carries on to envelope flap where crescent-shaped stamp is used in interlace filling of a blind-tooled roundel ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; endbands essentially lost, only traces of primaries remain ; in quite poor condition with much delamination of boards, abrasion, moisture damage, and staining ; leather of fore-edge flap has lifted and a portion of the pasteboard is lost ; fore-edge and envelope flap are in quite a fragile state ; spine leather is also lifting and cover is detaching from textblock at spine, exposing spine lining.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper in two types ; the first type is crisp and fairly smooth, well-burnished with a somewhat glossy finish, roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines difficult to discern but seemingly sporadic and possibly grouped ; the second type appears in the run of ternions toward the end of the text and is much thicker, more opaque, roughly and only lightly burnished with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and scarce chain lines appearing sporadically ; undissolved fibers are seen in both types, even at the surface.', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with keywords distinguishing matn and sharḥ (i.e. "قول" and "اقول"), overlining, rare section heading, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq ; bold Persian or Transoxanian hand ; strong effect of slant to the right, with words occasionally descending to baseline ; vertical character ; casually pointed.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling-board evident).', 'Collation: 6 IV(48), III+1 (55), 2 IV(71), III+1 (78), 6 IV(126), 4 III (150), IV (158), VI-1 (169) ; chiefly quaternions ; first folio and last two folios initially left blank, now carry excerpts, etc. ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts, mistakenly skips two pages between pp.7-8 and pp.183-184).', 'Explicit: "وحكى عن اثارهم المرضية وسيرهم الحميدة [فراغ] نفعنا الله تع بمحبتهم اجمعين وجعلنا لهداهم متبعين وعصمنا الله زيغ [؟] الضالين وبعثنا يوم الدين مع الذين انعم الله عليهم من النبيين والصديقين والشهداء والصالحين وهذا اواخر الكتاب والحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة على محمد واله الطاهرين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة على سيدنا محمد واله اجمعين قال الحمد لمن وجب وجوده وبقاؤه ... اقول هذه الخطة معظم مطالب اصول الدين من اثبات الصانع وصفاته ..."', 'Title from inscription on fol.1a (p.3).', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the commentary on al-Bayḍāwī's Ṭawāliʻ al-anwār min maṭāliʻ al-anẓār."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 49', 'Origin: Neither place nor date of composition or copying is specified in colophon. Paper, hand, decoration, etc. suggest late 17th or early 18th century. Ownership statement suggests a terminus ante quem of 1701 (or possibly 1691).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 20. Commentary on Dalail al-khairat."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in light brown goatskin ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings and interior of envelope flap in a pale orange (salmon) laid paper ; lining of fore edge flap in green silk ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped central mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. NSd7) with annular stamp accents and tooled border of blind rules and a series of roundels ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn in blue thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in white and blue, good condition ; state of preservation is fair to good with some separation of pages (assessment provided by J. Miller).', 'Support: European laid paper with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines (horizontal) spaced 22-24 mm. apart, and watermarks of grapes (raisin, with stem, parallel to chains, see p.2, 24, 230, 632, 634, etc.) and crown above small cartouche with "M A" flanking four-petaled flour or cross (perpendicular to chains, see p.2, 30, 32, 152, 154, 641, etc. and compare Heawood 2308 dated 1704, without crown but paired with grapes), sturdy, cream in color, well-burnished to glossy ; back flyleaf of laid European paper, chain lines running vertically, with watermark of horn in shield (without crown above).', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) on fol.1b with red, blue, and black vegetal designs; bears cartouche carrying title and prayer; gold border on incipit page and facing page (pp.2-3); red rule-borders through remainder of text; text rubricated with matn in red ink, sharḥ in black ink; diagrams showing orientation of tombs of the Prophet, Abū Bakr, and ʻUmar (pp.231-233).', 'Script: Naskh ; angular Egyptian hand in a medium line ; virtually serifless with curvilinear though somewhat flattened descenders, pointing mainly in distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ, slight effect of inclination toward the left ; title in cartouche on fol.1a in nastaʻlīq.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page; frame-ruled (impression of ruling-board evident).', 'Collation: i, 31 V (310), VI (322), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals.', 'Colophon: "Authorial," rectangular then triangular, reads: "هذا اخر ما قصدت وتمام الوعد الذي وعدت ولا ايمن ان اكون اسقطت او حرفت شيا من متن الكتاب سهوا و رحم الله امرا راي خللا ... فان الخطا والخطل غير مستغرب من الانسان المطبوع على عدم الاحسان ... الحمد لله الذي هدانا لهذا وما كنا نهتدي لو لا ان هدانا الله والحمدلله وحده وصلى الله على من لا نبيه بعده سيدنا محمد خاتم النبيين والمرسلين سبحانه ربك رب العزة عما ...والحمدلله رب العالمين ناشدتك الله ان عليك عاينت لي خطا فاستر فان خيار [كذا] الناس من سترا "', 'Explicit: "وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم تسليما وهذا اخر الكتاب في النسخة السهلية على ما عند جدي للامام ابي العباس احمد ابن يوسف الفاسي رحمهما الله وغيره عنها كما في غيرها زيادة والحمد لله رب العالمين وزاد في بعض النسخ بعد هذا ... و كتب ايضا الشيخ رضي الله تعالى عنه على ظهر نسخة اخرى هذين البيتين ... وفي رواية معظم هذا اخر ما قضدت ... "', 'Incipit: "يقول العبد الفقير الى الله سبحانه ... محمد المهدي بن احمد بن علي بن يوسف الفاسي ... الحمد لله الذي اختص رسوله محمدا صلى الله عليه وسلم بخالص حبه"', "Title from 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Commentary by Muḥammad al-Mahdī ibn Aḥmad al-Fāsī on al-Jazūlī's celebrated collection of prayers for the Prophet, Dalāʼil al-khayrāt."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 4', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon. Paper and ownership statements suggest late 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Folded scrap with sums (paginated pp.113-116) -- b. Entire quaternion from another manuscript (paginated pp.337-352) -- c. Folded slip with "دعاء ايمان" (paginated pp.483-486).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 27. Maalim al-tanzil."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in tan brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings and interior of flap in yellow paper ; upper and lower covers bear large, blind-stamped, scalloped mandorla with red-brown leather recessed onlays and gold-painted accents, along with guilloché roll border consisting of a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in pink and yellow-brown thread, two stations ; endbands in cream, headband partly gone, only traces of primaries and core remain for tailband ; in poor condition with abrasion, staining, severe lifting and losses of leather at fore-edge flap, upper cover fully detached, delamination of boards, some loose quires, and spine slant (cocked) ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper in what appears to be several types with spacing of chain lines ranging from 16-20 mm. apart to 27-28 mm. apart and spacing of laid lines ranging from 9 laid lines per cm. to 12 laid lines per cm. ; numerous watermarks including three hats, horn, three circles with initials and cross above, etc. ; various types seem fairly evenly distributed throughout the codex, even within each quire ; crisp and not too thick, though sturdy ; varying from lightly burnished to well-burnished and nearly glossy ; some leaves with a yellowish tint ; some staining and leather burn.', 'Decoration: Simple illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) on fol.1b (p.2) consisting of scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) in gold, outlined in red and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area of incipit and facing page bordered in frame with gold band outlined by black, red, and blue fillets ; textual dividers in the form of discs, commas, etc. in red and green ; text rubricated with headings, keywords, overlining, text of Qurʼān being commented upon, etc. in red ; some notabilia (side-heads) and keywords in green.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Turkish or Persian hand ; virtually serifless, but head-serifs appearing irregularly on final alif (left-sloping), lām of definite article, etc. ; mainly closed counters ; some sweeping descenders ; free assimilation of some letters including final alif and following alif or lām, final hāʼ and dāl, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 35 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 35 V (350), IV(358), 4 V(398), IV+1 (407) ; chiefly quinions ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals accompanying an initial kāf appearing in the upper outer corner of the recto of the first leaf of each quire from quire 2 through quire 12 ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Explicit: "واني خفت الموالي والموالي بنو العم وقال مجاهد العصبة وقال ابو صالح الكلالة وقال الكلبي الورثة"', 'Incipit: "اخبرنا الشيخ الامام الفقيه ... المريدي رحمه الله تعالى قال اخبرنا الشيخ الامام ... الهرري قرأة عليه قال ثنا شيخنا الامام ... ابو محمد الحسين بن مسعود المعروف بالفرا رضي الله عنه اجازة ان لم يكن سماعا قال الحمد لله ذي العظمة والكبرياء والعزة والبقاء ... اما بعد فان الله جل ذكره ارشد رسوله بالهدى ودين الحق رحمة للعالمين ..."', 'Title from titlepiece on fol.1a (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', '4. fol.406a-fol.407b : [blank].', '3. fol.359a-fol.405b : al-Juzʼ al-thālith min Maʻālim al-tanzīl fī tafsīr al-Qurʼān.', '2. fol.358a-fol.358b : [blank].', '1. fol.1a-fol.357b : al-Rubʻ [al-awwal wa-]al-thānī min Tafsīr al-Baghawī.', "Fine copy of the first three quarters of al-Baghawī's celebrated commentary on the Qurʼān. Third quarter appears incomplete as it ends abruptly in Sūrat Maryam (19)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 538', 'Origin: As appears in scribal colophon on p.177, transcription completed 11 Shawwāl 1268 [ca. 29 July 1852]. As appears in preceding authorial colophon (also on p.177), composition completed 27 Ramaḍān 1089 [ca. 12 November 1678].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Between pp.74-75, what appears to be a cigarette paper printed with "MANUFACTURE DE TABACS ET CIGARETTES" and "ورق صحي" in blue and black.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and label on lower cover "IL 351" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in a coated and textured (with floral pattern) sky blue decorative paper with dark brown (to black) leather over spine (now mostly gone exposing dark green textile of spine lining) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in yellow wove paper ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; overall in somewhat poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, etc.', 'Support: European wove paper.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant, spacious Turkish hand in a medium to bold line ; serifless with many closed counters, characteristic descent of words to baseline, slight effect of tilt to the right, elongation of horizontal strokes, and letterforms characteristic of nastaʻlīq (talik) ; from about p.133 alternates with another hand, more compact though with elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes ; some Qurʼānic excerpts in naskh.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 8 V(80), IV (88), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," reads "وقد فرغنا من تصنيف هذا الشرح المبارك ان شاء الله صبحية نهار الجمعة السابع والعشرين من شهر رمضان المبارك سنه تسع وثمانين بعد الالف على يد مصنفه الحقير الفقير عبد الغني النابلسي ... آمين" ; "Scribal," reads "وكان الفراغ من كتابة هذه النسخة يوم الخميس احدى عشر من الشهر الشوال سنه ثمانيه وستين ومائتين والف تم تم"', 'Explicit: "الى يوم الدين وهو يوم القيامة وله اسماء كثيرة وهذا اخر ما تشرفنا به من خذمة هذه الرسالة المباركة نفعنا الله بها ... آمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي شرح بالتجليات الازلية رسالة صفاته بمنية ... اما بعد فيقول اسير الذنوب ... عبد الغني بن اسماعيل النابلسي نسبا الحنفي مذهبا القادري مشربا الدمشقي وطنا النقشبندي سرا وعلنا ... ان اشرح الرسالة المعربة من اللغة الفارسية الى اللغة العربية المنسوبة بالجمع والترتيب الى العارف الكامل ... الشيخ تاج الدين النقشبني ... التي صنفها في بيان اداب الطريقة الطاهرة النقشبندية ... واظهرت في هذا الشرح ما انطوت عليه هذه الرسالة المأنوسة من الاسرار المحفوظة ... وسميتها مفتاح المعية في طريقة النقشبندية ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.5).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the commentary by ʻAbd al-Ghanī al-Nābulusī (d.1731) on the Naqshbandī treatise, Risālah fī sulūk khāṣṣat al-sādah by Tāj al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Zakarīyā ibn Sulṭān al-ʻAbshamī al-Naqshbandī (d.1640).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 303', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.163b, copying completed in the year 989 [1581 or 1582] in Qazvīn.', 'Binding: Pasteboard (quite thin) covered in dark brown leather; Type III binding (without flap); upper and lower covers bear a gold-tooled central crosshatched diamond figure with emanating vertical lines that evoke pendants; doublures covered in orange paper; initial and final leaves covered in blue marbled paper; likely not the original binding since traces of a flap are found on fol.1a; in good condition.', 'Support: non-European (Persian) laid paper with laid lines running horizontally at roughly 8 laid lines per cm., chain lines running vertically and evenly spaced 30 mm. apart.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece on incipit page (fol.1b) consists of two rectangular panels; the lower panel contains an empty gold cartouche on a lapis lazuli field flanked by two palmettes and vegetal accents, dominant colors are gold, red, light blue, white; upper panel features a semi-circular piece protruding through the top of the panel, executed in gold, black, red, lapis lazuli, and reddish-brown and decorated with vegetal designs including gold vines and flowers in light blue, red, pink, and some yellow; text is bordered by frame in red (reddish-orange), green, black, and gold; frame of incipit page adds light blue band and eliminates green band; text of incipit and facing pages is decorated with gold cloud-bands; text on all pages following the incipit and facing pages is set in a field of light blue flecked with gold; hemistiches are separated by two fine golden bands; text partially rubricated with headings in red and yellow (or gold), now faded.', 'Script: Nasta‘līq; single hand.', 'Layout: Written in 12 lines per page; single column of text, each line comprising a verse of poetry, with the two hemstitches of each verse divided by two thin, golden, bands.', 'Collation: 20 IV (160), II (164); chiefly quaternions with one binion; catchwords lacking; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (referenced in cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب على يد الفقير الحقير المحتاج الى رحمة الله الغني عزيز في شهور سنة ۹۸۹ بدار السلطنة القزوين"', 'Explicit: "جز اين اعتمادم بيارى تست اميدم به آمرزگارى تست بضاعت نيارم الا اميد خدايا ز عفوم مكن نااميد"', 'Incipit: " بنام خداوند جان آفرين حكيم سخن در زبان آفرين خداوند بخشنده دسنگير كريم خطابخش و پوزش پذير"', 'Title from preface fol.5a.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Saʻdī's Būstān. Description provided by Derek Mancini-Lander."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 927', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 76', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "منهاج العابدين الى الجنة | الغزالى| J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Wove paper of three different types.', 'Decoration: Some heading and portions of text in purple and red ink (see pp.21-22).', 'Script: Naskh and ruqʻah ; likely executed by the same hand ; opening two works mainly in naskh (with influence of ruqʻah), mainly serifless with slight effect of inclination to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed, free assimilation of letters ; opening work in a bold line, second in a thinner line ; final work mainly in ruqʻah, a quick, compact hand in a medium line, serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of words descending to baseline and inclination to the left, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15-21 lines per page ; unruled, lines often curved or sagging.', "Collation: Internal pagination in pencil, Hindu-Arabic numerals, for opening of second work (see pp.22-28) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization ; a few pages left partially blank to serve at 'title pages' (see pp.1, 21, 35).", 'Incipit: [Minhāj al-ʻābidīn] "وصلى الله على سيدنا ومولانا محمد وعلى آله وصحبه وسلم قال الشيخ الامام الصالح الزاهد عبد الملك ابن عبد الله رضي الله تعالى عنه وارضاه املى علي الشيخ الاجل الزاهد حجة الاسلام زين الدين شرف الائمة ابو حامد محمد بن محمد بن محمد الغزالي الطوسي رفع الله في الجنة درجته هذا الكتاب وهو آخر كتاب صنفه الحمد لله الملك الحليم الجواد الكريم العزيز الحكيم الذي فطر السموات والارض بقدرته ودبر الامور في الدارين بحكمته وما خلق الجن والانس الا لعبادته فالطريق واضح للقاصدين والدليل لائح للناظرين ..." [Ḍābiṭ sharīf ] "كان ما كان وباسمه يكون ما يكوت ربنا افتح بيننا وبين قومنا بالحق وانت خير الفاتحين ضابط شريف يحتوي على عدة اسرار وفوائد اعلم ان كل ما ظننت ادراكه دون ان ينفذ بصرك الى ما وراءه كان ترى مثلا هذه الصورة او هذا الجسم ولم تعلم ما وراءهما من المعنى او الروح فانت في الحقيقة لم تدرك ذلك الشيء الذي ظننتك مدركا له من الادراك ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.35-p.53 : [Commentary upon and extracts from Miftāḥ ghayb al-jamʻ wa-al-wujūd, opening with Ḍābiṭ sharīf yaḥtawī ʻalá ʻiddat asrār wa-fawāʼid].', '3. p.34 : [blank].', '2. p.21-33 : Kitāb Minhāj al-ʻābidīn ilá al-jannah / al-Ghazzālī.', '1. p.1-p.20 : Kitāb Minhāj al-ʻābidīn ilá al-jannah / al-Ghazzālī.', 'Careful copy of a majmūʻah with two partial transcripts of Minhāj al-ʻābidīn, a work of Ṣūfī thought attributed to al-Ghazālī, followed by a selection of commentary upon and extracts from Miftāḥ ghayb al-jamʻ wa-al-wujūd, Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Qūnawī’s (d.1274) chief philosophical work.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 515', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests 17th or 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From spine label and inscription on interior of upper cover, "IL 342 " (likely supplied by Yahuda, see Acquisitions slip) ; "٤٦٧" on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in yellow paper ; upper and lower covers bear blind-stamped mandorla with vegetal composition (vertical and horizontal symmetry, at center eight-petalled flower) and tooled border consisting of a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and brown ; in fair condition with some abrasion and staining.', "Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-27 mm. apart, three crescents watermark and a variety of countermarks with 'F' and 'M' (or 'W') ; thick and well-burnished.", 'Decoration: Section headings and keywords marking subsections (such as قصل) rubricated ; subheadings overlined in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Turkish [or possibly Iraqi?] hand ; mainly serifless but occasional (inconsistent) right-sloping headserifs appear on initial and medial lām, alif, etc. ; effect of tilt to the left ; many closed counters ; pointing in curved lines (for two and three dots) ; point of final nūn often assimilated with bowl ; rightward descenders tapered ; alif maqṣūrah often mardūdah ; occasionally vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 9 V(90), V-4+2 (98), i ; almost entirely regular quinions ; front flyleaf affixed to opening leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert and back flyleaf).', '"Scribal [?]," "triangular," reads: "تم كتاب منهاج العابدين الى الجنة ... تصنيف الامام السعيد حجة الاسلام ابى حامد محمد بن محمد الغزالي برد الله مضجعه ولله الحمد والمنة امين يا معين"', 'Explicit: "دعتنا الى تصنع وتزين مما سطرناه او كلام نظمناه او علم افدناه ونسأله ان يجعلنا واياكم معشر الاخوان بما علمناه عاملين ولوجهه مريدين وان لا يجعله وبالا علينا ويضعه في ميزان الصالحات اذا ردت اعمالنا اليه انه جواد كريم وهذا ما اوردنا ان نذكره في شرح كيفية سلوك طريق الاخرة وقد وفى بالمقصود والحمد لله الذي بنعمته تتم الصالحات وصلى الله على خير مولد دعا الى افضل معبود محمد النبي واله وسلم تسليما الى يوم الدين"', 'Incipit: "املى علينا الشيخ الامام السعيد حجة الاسلام ابو حامد محمد بن محمد الغزالي رحمة الله عليه هذا المختصر وهو اخر كتاب صنفه ولم يستمله الا خواص اصحابه واوله الحمد لله الملك الحليم الجواد الكريم العزيز الرحيم الذي فطر السموات والارض بقدرته ..."', 'Title from heading at opening on p.4.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine of copy of Minhāj al-ʻābidīn, a work of Ṣūfī thought, attributed to al-Ghazālī. Description provided by Maxim Romanov.'])

en: (count: ['Illuminated colophon; text rubricated in gold and enclosed in gold borders; copy defective (missing first p. of text).', 'and Printed Books, British Library. May 14 1980." Title p. states that this item is in author\'s own hand.', 'Dates of composition and copying in colophon: qad intahá ... ʻalá yad muʾallif hādhā al-kitāb ... Muḥammad ibn Farāmūz ibn ʻAlī ... fī ākhir Shaʻbān sanat khams wa-sabʻīn wa-thamānīmiʾah wa-qad kāna al-farāgh ʻan jamʻihi wa-taʾlīfihi wa-tartībihi wa-taṣnīfihi fī awāhir Ṣafar sanat tisaʻ wa-thalāthīn wa-thamānīmiʾah [i.e. September 1435]. Researcher\'s note on catalog card in repository: "Possibly later than stated in colophon. Muhammad Isa Waley, Dept. of Oriental Manuscripts', 'On uṣūl al-fiqh, the 4 foundations of Islamic jurisprudence (Koran, sunnah or prophetic tradition, qiyās or analogy, and ijmāʻ or consensus).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 911', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Accompanying materials: Slip of yellow tissue weight paper with note in purple pencil "مشكاة الانوار للغزالي ٦" (paginated pp.1-2).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 60', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "مشكاة الانوار للغزالى | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion.', 'Support: Wove paper of two main types (unlined) and machine laid paper (lined).', "Decoration: Entire text in red ink ; most 'title page' inscriptions in pencil.", 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of words descending to baseline and inclination to the left, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 16-26 lines per page ; not frame-ruled ; where paper is unlined, lines typically slant upward.', "Collation: Leaves between sections left fully blank or partially blank (serving as 'title pages' for the various sections, see pp.3, 11, 19, 27, 39, 47) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert).", 'Explicit: "وانما الذي يمكنني الآن ان اعرفك هذه الاقسام وبعض اصناف كل قسم فاقول"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله مفيض الانوار وفاتح الابصار وكاشف الاسرار ورافع الاستار ... اما بعد فقد سألتني ايها الاخ الكريم فيضك الله لطلب السعادة الكبرى ...."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' p.3.", 'Ms. codex.', "Careful though incomplete copy of al-Ghazālī's (d.1111) celebrated work on Ṣūfistic theory, arranged in six sections."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 586', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.845, composition completed 30 Ramaḍān 966 [ca. 6 July 1559]. Date of transcription not specified, though paper, hand, etc. suggest late 17th century. Shahādah statement provides a terminus ante quem of 1779.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Two acquisitions slips from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- c. Slips of a page torn from a printed book.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label, "IL 380" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in two different brown leathers (one lighter in shade than the other) with spine now covered in red leather ; Type II binding (once with flap, now lost) ; upper board lining in beige laid paper ; lower board lining in yellow-tinted laid paper ; upper cover carries blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition) and pendants, along with tooled border (a series of s-shaped stamps flanked by rules) ; lower cover carries blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OSh) ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in cream and red, fairly good condition ; overall in quite poor condition with flap lost, much abrasion and staining, delamination of lower board, pest damage, etc. ; composite cover (i.e. covers mismatched, upper cover perhaps recycled / reused), somewhat ill-fitting this manuscript with repairs in various leathers (some now damaged).', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; opening type with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 32-33 mm. apart (vertical), three circles topped by stylized crown watermark ("A" in middle circle, "D" in bottom, see p.4), triple mount countermark (see p.8), thin and crisp though sturdy, fairly transluscent, well-sized and burnished to glossy ; another type with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 21-23 mm. apart (vertical), three circles with cross above watermark ("IB" in center circle, crescent in top circle, see p.74) ; another type, beige to light brown in color with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 35 mm. apart (barely visible, vertical), large crown-star-crescent watermark (120 mm. tall, see p.92), quite cloudy, floccular formation with knots and inclusions ; type with another crown-star-crescent watermark (82 mm. tall, see p.100), 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 21 mm. apart (vertical) ; other types with crown atop three circles watermark (see p.122), scrollwork or coat of arms watermark (p.160), circles topped by cross flanked by lions watermark (see p.222) and three crescents watermark (see p.240) ; significant ink burn in written area of opening quires (some to break through with losses) ; minor pest damage.', "Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by vegetal accents (in gold on once light-blue ground), surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) with floral chains in gold, outlined in black with red and light-blue accents on fields of gold and light-blue along with green, red and blank central element, all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) and set in a well of red and gold bands ; title piece now obscured by leaf affixed to original 'title page' ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by a frame consisting of a narrow gold band flanked by black fillets, elsewhere written area surrounded by red-rule border ; keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of three inverted commas (in red) ; illustrated with several diagrams (see pp.61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67) mainly in mint green, red, and black, each with captions and extensive explanations.", 'Script: Naskh ; angular Egyptian [?] hand in a medium line ; partially (and irregularly) seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on mainly free-standing alif and lām, slight efefct of tilt to the left, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 29 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 2 IV(16), V (26), IV+1 (35), 8 V(115), V+2 (127), 7 V(197), IV (205), 16 V(365), IV (373) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in pencil, Hindu-Arabic numerals, on verso of each leaf through ٢٣ ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips from p.277 to p.378, thereafter off by 100 pages) ; as suggested by foliation skips from 6 to 19 with one leaf left unfoliated, as well as a gap in the text and mismatched catchwords, roughly 12 leaves missing between pp.14-15 ; catchwords on p.13 and 14 have been covered, likely in a deliberate attempt to make mismatch and missing leaves less obvious.', 'Colophon: "Authorial," triangular, reads "قال المؤلف رحمه الله تعالى لهذا الكتاب شيخ الطائفة والحقيقة القطب الرباني والفرد الصمداني الشيخ عبد الوهاب الشعراني وواقف فراغه منه في سلخ شهر رمضان المعظم سنة ست وستين وتسعمائة بمصر المحروسة"', 'Explicit: "واستمع يا اخي مصحي وامعن النظر فيه والزم الادب مع سائر الائمة المجتهدين ليأخذوا بيدك في هوال يوم الدين والحمد لله رب العالمين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين الذي جعل الشريعة المطهرة بحرا يتفرع منه جميع بحار العلوم ... وبعد فهذه ميزان نفيسة عالية المقدار حاولت فيها ما بنموه [نحوه] يمكن الجمع بين الادلة المتغائرة في الظاهر وبين اقوال جميع المجتهدين ..."', "Title from inscription on front flyleaf (p.1, now pasted to opening leaf over original 'title page').", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine early copy of al-Shaʻrānī's (d.1565) unabridged treatise on the four madhāhib, al-Mīzān al-kubrá."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1022', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.489, copied by Ibn ʻAynī Aznāwī [Aznāvī] with transcription completed 5 Jumādá II 1053 [ca. 21 August 1643].', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 171', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted paper ; upper and lower covers carry border and diagonal lines intersecting the center of the panel in blind rules ; sewn in brown thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and lavender, fairly good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, staining, losses to boards, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and occasional chain lines visible, though all rather indistinct ; well-burnished to glossy, fairly crisp though sturdy, cloudy formation with bundles of fibers visible, light brown in color, some leaves quite thin and transluscent ; opening two replacement leaves in European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Headings and keywords rubricated (text to be entered in red provided in margins, occasionally visible and otherwise cut off) ; textual dividers in the form of hāʼ or numeral khamsah in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; spacious, elegant Persianate hand in a thin line ; mainly serifless (though left-sloping head-serif occasionally appears) with elongation of horizontal strokes, fairly vertical ascenders, curvilinear descenders, adhering to baseline, freely ligatured, pointing in distinct or conjoined dots, final yāʼ unpointed, wide, open bowl of final nūn with point set down in, spacious open counters of ṭāʼ, ṣāḍ, etc. ; replacement leaves at opening in a large, bold naskh, seriffed (though somewhat irreguarly) with left-sloping head-serifs on most ascenders (even occasional free-standing alif), quite rounded with curvilinear descenders (some sweeping), freely ligatured.', 'Layout: Written in 14 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV-2+2 (8), 9 IV(80), III (86), 11 IV(174), III+1 (181), 8 IV(245) ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "وتشرف بتسويد كاغده اقل العباد بل لاشيء في الحقيقة الفقير الحقير الى الله ابن عيني ازناوي غفر الله لهما وللمؤمنين والمؤمنات والمسلمين والمسلمات بمنه وكرمه يوم السبت الخميس شهر جمادى الثاني سنة ثلاث وخمسين والف من الهجرة النبوية المصطوفية"', 'Explicit: "ويختص ضمانها بالجناية على الآدمي حسب فهذا ما اردنا ذكره وقصدنا حصره مختصرين مطوله محررين محصله ونسأل الله ان يجعلنا ممن شكر عمله وغفر زلله وجعل الجنة منقبله [منقله] انه لا يخيب من سأله ولا يحرم من امله"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي صغرت في عظمته عبادة العابدين وحصرت عن شكر نعمة السنة الحامدين ... اما بعد فاني مورد لك في هذا المختصر خلاصة المذهب المعتبر بالفاظ محبرة وعبارة [عبارات] محررة تظرفك بنخبه وتوصلك الى شعبه مقتصرا على ما بان لي سبيله ووضح لي دليله ..."', 'Title from rubricated heading at opening on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the author's abridgment of his own Sharāʼiʻ al-Islām, recognized as the authoritative work on Shīʻī law."])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Anchor in circle. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), nos. 1-8.', 'Text rubricated; bayts numbered by copyist; marginal corrections in hand of copyist (same as that of Mich. Isl. Ms. 715,2).', 'Date and name of copyist and client in colophon: kamala al-kitāb wa-tamma ... ʻalá yad mālikihi al-ḥaqīr Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd al-Fattāḥ lil-shaykh al-Ḥusaynī al-Mālalī[?] al-Qāsimī al-Jadīdī bi-al-Azhar al-muʻammaq 12 Ramaḍān al-muʻaẓẓam sanat 1032 [10 July 1623].', 'Pp. [1-10]. Bound with: Kitāb fī al-taksīr fī ʻilm al-ḥisāb, pp. [11-14].', 'A poem on arithmetic.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 960', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper and hand suggest 18th century for transcription of opening works ; transcription of final work perhaps late 18th or early 19th century.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 109', 'Binding: Boards covered in textured black cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; resewn in white thread, eight stations ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "موقد الاذهان" ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: European laid paper of three different types ; opening work on type with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-27 mm. apart, three crescents watermark (perpendicular to the chains, 90 mm. long, and "M" visible in p.2, light cream, burnished to glossy ; next work on a type with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22-23 mm. apart, and crown-star-crescent watermark with "[?] B" underneath (see pp.38, 44), burnished, dingier cream color ; final work on a type with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (vertical), and three crescents watermark (perpendicular to chains, 75 mm. long), fairly rough.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and passages of text being commented upon rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of three dots.', 'Script: Naskh and Sūdānī ; opening work in a distinctive naskh with influence of Maghribī, a clear, spacious hand in a medium line, partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on free-standing alif and initial lām, fairly vertical, quite blocky with rectilinear descenders, some elongation of horizontal strokes, flat strokes preferred to curves, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots ; second work in naskh, a clear, compact Egyptian hand in a medium line, mainly serifless with slight effect of inclination to the left, and of words descending to baseline, curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots ; final work in Sūdānī script, carefully executed in a bold line, with slight inclination of words to the left and gently sweeping rectilinear descenders.', 'Layout: Written in 17, 23 and 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of misṭarah visible in opening work).', 'Collation: i, V (10), III (16), IV (24), 2 II(32), IV (40), i ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Incipit: [Mūqid al-adhhān] "قال الشيخ الامام العلامة جمال الدين عبد الله بن يوسف بن هشام رحمه الله اما بعد حمد الفاتح عقد الاعوان المانح بالايجاز جاعل علم العربية في العلوم كالطراز فيه تفك مقفلات الالغاز ... وسميته موقد الاذهان وموقظ الوسنان ..." ; [Sharḥ qaṣīdat Muthallath Quṭrub] "قال الفقيه سديد الدين ابو القاسم عبد الوهاب بن الحسن ابن بركات المهلبي نظمت مثلث قطرب في قصيد قلتها ابياتا على حروف المعجم ... يدل كل بيت على شرح ما نظمته من اللعة اشارة واختصارا ..." ; [Ḥujjat al-masʼūl ʻalá ʻilm al-tawḥīd] "قال الفقير الى رحمة ربه ابو بكر بن محمد بن ابي بكر ... فهذه مختصرة جمعتها ترجمة للوتار سميتها حجة المسؤول على علم التوحيد ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '4. p.65-p.80 : Ḥujjat al-masʼūl ʻalá ʻilm al-tawḥīd / Abū Bakr ibn Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr.', '3. p.33-p.64 : Kitāb Sharḥ qaṣīdat Muthallath Quṭrub fil-lughah al-ʻarabīyah /Ibrāhīm al-Lakhmī.', '2. p.32 : [blank].', '1. p.1-p.31 : Kitāb Mūqid al-adhhān wa-mūqiẓ al-wasnān / ʻAbd Allāh ibn Yūsuf Ibn Hishām.', 'Composite codex opening with two grammatical works, the first Mūqid al-adhhān wa-mūqiẓ al-wasnān of Ibn Hishām (d.1360) and the second an incomplete commentary on the versification by ʻAbd al-Wahhāb ibn al-Ḥasan al-Bahnasī (d.1286 or 7) of the Muthallath, a work by the lexicographer and grammarian Abū ʻAlī Muḥammad ibn al-Mustanīr known as Quṭrub. The codex concludes with Ḥujjat al-masʼūl ʻalá ʻilm al-tawḥīd, a theological work by Abū Bakr ibn Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr ibn Mālik.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 517', 'Origin: As appears at close on p.190, copied by one Muṣṭafá (Mustafa) from or on the authority of Ibn Aḥmad (İbn-i Ahmet) with transcription completed 15 Dhū al-Qaʻdah 1212 [ca. 1 May 1798].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From inscription on \'title page\' (p.5) and label on lower cover, "IL 393" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark olive green coated and textured paper with dark green-blue leather over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in shell marbled paper (in blue, brown, and yellow) ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands red and yellow, fairly good condition with some damage ; overall in fair condition.', 'Support: European laid paper of at least two types ; opening type with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 21-22 mm. apart (horizontal), three wishbones or stirrups [or inverted crescents?] and "A C" countermark (see p.6, 8, 52, 53, etc.) ; another type with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertial), chain lines spaced 23 mm. apart (horizontal), and "G F A" with eagle and three stylized hats watermarks (see p.148, 152, etc.).', 'Decoration: Keywords rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant hand in a medium line ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, mainly open counters, curvilinear descenders ; freely ligatured and somewhat casually pointed (with many mistakes) ; partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 8 V (80), VI (92), I (94) ; chiefly quinions ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and skips two pages between pp.43 and 44).', 'Colophon: "اثر خامه [؟] مصطفى عن ابن احمد در راه كتخدايى راه ايى زاده سنه اثنين عشر وماتين والف في ۱٥ شهر ذق ..."', 'Explicit: "واجعل اللهم ثواب ذلك نجاة لي ولاخواني من النار يا مهيمن يا ستار امين والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الواجب الوجود الذي شهد بوجوده كل من في الاكوان ... اما بعد فيقول العبد الفقير الى رحمة ربه القدير ... محمد ابو ثابت ابن الرفاعي ان هذا الكتاب تذكرة للعاقل وتنبيها للغافل ... وسميتها النصيحة المحبين وروضة الموحدين ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.5) and opening on pp.9-10.", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of a treatise on Sufism and theological matters by Muḥammad Abū Thābit Ibn al-Rifāʻī al-Nahrawānī (d.1045/1635).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 274', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at close on p.542, copied by Muḥammad Zamān ibn Sayyid Murād al-Ḥusaynī with transcription completed 5 Shaʻbān 1051 [ca. 9 November 1641].', 'Accompanying materials: Scrap with notes between pp.416-417.', 'Former shelfmark: "534 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" in pencil and "5/3" in ink on \'title page\' (p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards (quite heavy) faced in light brown leather and edged in dark red leather (leather faced and edged binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in brown leather ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped (with recessed paper onlays) mandorla, pendants and cornerpieces (each filled with vegetal composition) ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with much abrasion, delamination, staining, moisture damage, lifting and losses of leather, shrinkage, etc.', 'Support: non-European (Persian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly distinct, some curving) and no chain lines plainly visible, sturdy though crisp and transluscent, quite well-burnished, some inclusions.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ ) at opening on p.2 consisting of small rectangular panel carrying the basmalah surrounded by gilt cloud-bands and flanked by swirling floral vegetal pattern in green, pink, lavender, yellow, white, etc. on fields of gold, surmounted by larger rectangular panel evoking book cover design with empty gold central cartouche (or mandorla) flanked by pendants and surrounded by swirling floral vegetal pattern on a lapis lazuli ground, surmounted by a scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) filled with the same floral vegetal designs on fields of lapis lazuli and gold ; entire piece surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and set into a well of gold with black vegetal design ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of innermost gold band flanked by black fillets with outermost red and blue rules ; keywords and some abbreviation symbols (stroke above notable words, etc.) rubricated ; overlining in red ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas and discs in red ; numerous tables and line diagrams in red and black (see p.30, 64, 65, 67-69, 70, 71, 72, 83, 344, 346) ; two maps (including world with 7 iqlīms, seas, cities, locales, etc. see p.340-341 and p.496-497).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand, characteristically serifless and with descent of words to baseline, exaggerated thickness of elongated horizontal strokes ; Arabic excerpts in a compact, elegant naskh, fairly vertical and adhering to baseline ; occasional vocalization.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 34 IV (272), I (274) ; almost exclusively quaternions ; lacuna on pp.28-29 (pages left partially blank) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between pp.33-34).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تم الكتابة على يد الفقير محمد زمان ابن سيد مراد الحسيني ستر عيوبهما وغفر ذنوبهما في خامس شهر شعبان سنه ١٠٥١ تم تم تم تم تم تم"', 'Explicit: "و ختم سخن و دعا را برين كلمات اختصار رفت ... نجز الكتاب والحمد لله اولا واخرا وظاهرا وباطنا وصلى الله على محمد المصطفى طاهرا وافيا والسلام"', 'Incipit: "چون واهب مواهب بى علت علت كلمته كه مبدع محژعات ومحژع مبدعاتست ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the important cosmographical and geographical work by Ḥamd Allāh Mustawfī Qazvīnī (d. after 1340), particularly significant for the human geography of the last period of the Īlkhān empire. Contributions to the cataloguing from Hossein Alizadeh and David Hughes.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 300', 'Origin: As appears in colophon, copied by Muḥammad al-Kātib al-Nūr with transcription completed in Rabīʻ I 993 [March 1585] in the village of Zarah [Zirih ?] in Bākharz.', 'Former shelfmark: "536 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in spring green silk with red leather over spine and edges / turn-ins (silk faced, leather edged framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures and hinges in marbled paper (in dark blue and white) ; upper and lower covers carry gold-tooled guilloché borders defined by gold rules ; sewn in pink thread, four stations ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support: Written area on non-European (likely Persian) laid paper set into border of tinted paper and mounted in frame of tinted (or marbled) paper of varying shades (dark blue, yellow, dark greek, pale pink, etc.), hinged together with contrasting tinted and gold-painted guards ; frames with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal or vertical, quite distinct) and occasional chain lines visible (possibly grouped), quite well-burnished ; flyleaves in European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 27 mm. apart (vertical) and crown watermark (front) and with 12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 20 mm. apart (vertical), and three hats watermark (back).', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying the title in red "بوستان" surrounded by delicate swirling floral vegetal designs in gold, white, and red on a field of lapis lazuli with gold accents, surrounded by bands of white (with black crosses), gold and turquoise and surmounted by a much narrower rectangular piece with black cartouches filled with delicate swirling vegetal design in gold, white and red and set off by orange, turquoise and gold accents, itself surmounted by a band of gold and black interlace and flanked by bands of white (with black crosses) and turquoise ; headings rubricated ; written area gold-flecked and surrounded by a frame consisting of a colored width of the paper (surface-dyed in shades varying by page) flanked by narrow bands of gold, turquoise, red, gold, blue and black, divisions within defined by narrow gold bands outlined in black fillets ; marginal decoration in grand floral vegetal motifs in gold.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; exquisite hand in a delicate line ; serifless with effect of inclination to the right, words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 12 lines per page, mainly divided to two columns. ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 3 (3), 3 III(21), i ; catchwords present.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تحريرا فى شهر ربيع الاول سنه ٩٩٣ كتبه العبد المذنب محمد الكاتب النور غفر ذنوبه وستر عيوبه بولايت باخرز در قريۀ رزه صورت تحرير يافت"', 'Explicit: "بضاعت نیاوردم الا امید خدایا ز عفوم مکن [نا] امید""', 'Incipit: "بنام خداوند جان آفرین حکیم سخن در زبان آفرین ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' and illuminated headpiece at opening.", 'Ms. codex.', 'Exquisite copy of selections from the Būstān, the celebrated mas̲navī of Saʻdī (d.1292), renowned Persian poet and prose writer. Contributions to the cataloguing from Ali Rafi.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 639', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.95, copied by ʻAlī ibn Chak al-Sachdī [?] (Ali b. Çek es-Seçti) with transcription completed 957 [1550 or 51].', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and label on lower cover "IL 390" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (mainly in blue, yellow and red) with brown leather over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins (framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in olive green paper ; sewn in blue thread, two stations ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather at board edges and fore edge flap, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 4-5 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and single chain lines (horizontal) spaced around 90 mm. apart ; quite cloudy formation, sturdy and well-burnished ; some staining and tide lines ; some repairs.', 'Decoration: Keywords, abbreviations (sigla), and vocalization (for the verses being commented upon) rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; compact Caucasian (Azeri) [?] hand ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to left and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing in distinct dots, descenders mainly curvilinear.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page.', 'Collation: VI-1 (7), 2 IV(23), I (25), 2 IV(41), III+1 (48) ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "وقع الفراغ من تنميق هذه النسخة الشريفة المباركة المسماة بنزهة الطالبين يوم الثلاث [؟] وقت الظهر على يدي اضعف العباد واحقرهم عملا واكبرهم ذنبا واحوجهم الى غفران الله على بن چك السچدى في سنه سبع وخمسين وتسعمائة من هجرة النبي صلى الله [عليه وسلم] "', 'Explicit: "وبالنغم متعلق به والباء للاستعانة بلفظ الاستعانة ختم كتابنا ونستعين بالله على ان يختم اعمالنا بما نرجو به سعادة ما لنا وهو نعم النصير على امالنا"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله نحمده ونستعينه ونعوذ بك من شرور انفسنا ومن سيئات اعمالنا ... فيقول احقر العباد وافقرهم المستعيذ بالله من عقابه الاليم احمد بن محمد بن ابي بكر غفر الله لهم ... رويت القصيدة المباركة الموسومة بالكواكب الدرية المسماة بالبردة النبوية المنسوبة الى الامام العلامة ابي عبد الله محمد بن سعيد الدلاصي البوصيري عن الشيخ ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1) and colophon on p.95.", 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy of the commentary by Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr al-Shīrāzī (fl.1407) on al-Būṣīrī's (d.1296?) celebrated poem in praise of the Prophet, al-Kawākib al-durrīyah fī madḥ khayr al-barīyah, widely known as al-Burdah."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 602', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.154, transcription completed 13 Rabīʻ II 1022 [ca. 2 June 1613].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. -- c. Slip with note of Winifred Smeaton Thomas on missing leaf between pp.40-41.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 281" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leathers (appear to have been cut down from already covered and decorated larger boards and the cut edges covered in another leather) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry tooled central binding binding ornament consisting of three dodecagons (accented with gold-paint) inscribed within a circle (compare Weisweiler class. W 24) surrounded by a heavy band in a series of s-shapes set in rules as well as an outermost series of x-shaped stamps with radiating gold-painted strokes (x-shaped stamps also appear within the dodecagons) ; detached floral pendants and a rule border complete the composition ; sewing mainly gone though two stations evident, many bifolia split ; overall in poor condition with much abrasion, staining, delamination of boards, lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; likely never attached to text block (simply serves as a wrapper).', 'Support: European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (horizontal), and anchor in circle with leaf above watermark (see pp.12-13, etc.) ; burnished to glossy, sturdy and dark cream in color.', 'Decoration: Keywords accented with red (over elongated horizontal strokes) ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; some abbreviation symbols rubricated.', "Script: Naskh ; neat, round 'Syrian' or Egyptian [?] hand in a medium line ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in distinct or conjoined dots, partially vocalized.", 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V (10), V-1 (19), 5 V(69), IV-1 (76), i ; chiefly quinions ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "وكان الفراغ من كتابته يوم الاحد وقت العصر ثالث عشر ربيع الثاني سنة اثنين وعشرين والف من الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلاة والسلام وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم فسيكفيكهم الله وهو السميع العليم"', 'Explicit: "ان الذين من قبلكم بنوا مشيدا واملوا بعيدا وجمعوا كثيرا فاصبح املهم غرورا وجمعهم بورا ومساكنهم قبورا قال مصنفه رحمه الله جمعت هذه الاحرف بالقدس الشريف راجيا من الرب اللطيف العفو عما اجترحته وصيعت وقتي فيه بالتسويف تم الكتاب بحمد الله وعونه وحسن توفيقه"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي خلق الموجودات من ظلمة العدم بنور الايجاد ... وبعد فان الناس كانوا في الجاهلية جهلا وعمية عميا ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the work of anecdotes from the life of the prophet, the first four Caliphs, and the Umayyads (see Brockelmann, C. GAL, II 95, 25. / no.6).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 98', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper would suggest late 16th or early 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Three folded half-sheets of blue wove paper (with embossed mark with crown above "BATH") carrying excerpts in black ink (paginated pp.43-54).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 32. Commentary on Kuduri."', 'Binding: Limp to semi-limp in black leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in paper ; upper and lower covers bear blind-stamped central mandorla (vegetal design, both vertical and horizontal symmetry, difficult to tell whether includes chī clouds or not, possibly Déroche NSd) and pendants with incised rule-border and corner pieces ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; fine worked chevron endbands in green and red ; in poor condition with severe moisture damage, shrinkage (upper cover especially), abrasion of cover designs, cracking and lifting of leather at spine, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. and chain lines (horizontal) spaced about 29 mm. apart ; three crescents / tre lune watermark (compare Heawood 865) ; wear to textblock due to ill-fitting cover, along with moisture damage and some ink burn.', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with section headings, keywords, overlining, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; bold Turkish (?) hand ; essentially serifless ; effect of slight tilt to the left ; mainly open counters ; often sweeping tail of final nūn or yāʼ essentially underlines following word ; occasionally vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling-board evident).', 'Collation: i, 10 V(100), V+1 (111), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, occasionally lost to wear (indiscriminately skips numerous leaves) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and insert).', 'Explicit: "فاذا صححت المسئلة المناسخة واردت معرفة ما يصيب كل واحد من حساب [؟] الدرهم قسمت ما صحت منه المسئلة على ثمانية واربعين فيما خرجت اخذت له من سهام وارث حبة والله اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب"', 'Incipit: "كتاب الطهارة قال الله تعالى يا ايها الذين امنوا اذا قمتم الى الصلوة فاغسلوا وجوهكم وايديكم الى المرافق وامسحوا برؤسكم وارجلكم الى الكعبين ..."', 'Title from heading on incipit page, fol.1b (p.4).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Neat copy of the celebrated Ḥanafī legal manual by Abū al-Ḥusayn Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad al-Qudūrī (d.1037).'])

en: (count: ['Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. suggest early to mid 16th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 148" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in olive-tinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, reminiscent of Déroche class. OSd 3), pendants and cornerpieces along with tooled border ; sewn in dark pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in blue (on cream primaries), fairly good condition though with minor damage to tailband ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, etc. ; repairs to spine and foreedge flap in brown leather.', "Support: European laid paper mainly with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 29 mm. apart (vertical), and anchor in circle watermark (in two lines, star above, 60 mm. tall, see p.6, 18, etc.), quite sturdy and well-burnished with burnisher's marks visible (horizontal on right-hand leaf and vertical on left-hand leaf) ; another type with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (vertical) and watermark of font with lid and cross [?] (or cardinal’s mitre / chapeau) watermark (see p.402, etc. and compare Chapeau nos. 3447, etc. in Briquet, Les Filigranes, Chapeau nos.2-8 dated 1549-1555 in Velkov, Les Filigranes dans les documents Ottomans and nos. 31-32 dated 1549-1550 in Nikolaev, Watermarks of the Ottoman Empire, vol. 1) ; repairs in another European paper ; in some sections alternating leaves in peach or beige.", "Decoration: Elegant illuminated titlepiece on 'title page' (p.3) in white, gold, blue, red, and green consisting of an upper rectangular panel with a lozenge carrying the title in white with gold outline on field of blue, surmounting the main panel with an eight-lobed medallion (shamsah) with lobes separated from the central disc by a series of bands in green, gold, red, and white, and carrying the author’s name in white with gold outline on a field of blue at the center ; corner pieces in red and green with gold vegetal designs appear in both panels and vertical stalks in blue and red accent the central medallion and outer frame ; written area of incipit page surrounded by yellow (perhaps once gilt) frame, elsewhere written area surrounded by red rule-border ; most keywords, sections headings and abbreviation symbols in red, some in mint green (see p.389, etc.) ; textual dividers in the form of red, blue, and green inverted commas.", 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Turkish hand ; seriffed with right-sloping head-serf on virtually all ascender letters apart from free-standing alif, slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ, kāf occasionally without bar (shaqq) but vertical stroke with hamzah ; hand changes around p.359, from there to close one or two more compact, graceful hands in a narrow line, quite rounded and freely ligatured.', 'Layout: Written in 31 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V-2 (8), 23 V(238), VI (250), 4 V(290), i ; chiefly quinions ; fol. 2 and 5 transposed ; middle of the quire marks in the form of oblique stroke in the lower outer margin of the right-hand leaf (some quires only) ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Explicit: "فبقي الباقي مقسوما على سهامهم فيما نقل هذا منه بعد قوله سهامهم نجز الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب والله اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب وصلى الله وسلم على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم تسليما كثيرا"', 'Incipit: "ان اجل ما يستهل به اللسان بالبيان واشد ما تشهد به الاركان من الجنان حمد مبدع فلق اتمار العلم عن احكام الاذهان ... وبعد فان الفقير الى رحمة الله ربه الغني ابا محمد محمود بن احمد العيني ... يقول لما امتحنت بما امتحن به من هو محسودا اما لعلمه وفضله ... اردت ان ازيل هذه الكدورات باشتغال البال في شرح كتاب من المصنفات فاخترت لذلك كتاب كنز الدقائق المنسوب الى ... ابي البركات عبد الله بن احمد بن محمود النسفي ... فاستخرت الله تعالى واخترعت له شرحا يدلل صعابه ويستخرج عن قشرة لبابه ... مسمى بكتاب رمز الحقائق في شرح كنز الدقائق ..."', 'Title from titlepiece on p.3 and opening on p.4.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of the well-known commentary by Badr al-Dīn Maḥmūd ibn Aḥmad al-ʻAynī (d.1451) on Abū al-Barakāt ʻAbd Allāh ibn Aḥmad al-Nasafī's (d.1310) Kanz al-daqāʼiq, a synopsis of his own Kitāb al-Wāfī, a legal work modeled after al-Marghīnānī's (d.1196 or 7) celebrated Hidāyah."])

en: (count: ['al-Ḥalajīj[?] ḥafaẓahu Allāh wa-katabahu al-faqīr Muḥammad ...[?]; on cover, manuscript notes in handwriting of Max Meyerhof.', 'corner of p. [90], ...[?]... nabawīyah ʻala ṣāḥibihā ...[?]... aḥad wa-sittīn wa-tisʻumiyah kāna awwal ...[?]... al-arbuʻāʾ wa-kāna fī Ramaḍān yawmayn wa-kāna awwal ...[?]... nawbat al-shaykh ʻAbd al-Bāsiṭ ḥafaẓahu Allāh wa-kāna fī nawbat al-shaykh ʻAbd al-Bāsiṭ tawqīt sayyidī Yūnus ḥāfaẓahu Allāh wa-fī nawbat al-shaykh Barakāt tawqīt sayyidī Jalāl al-Dīn al-Ramlī ḥafaẓahu Allāh wa-fī nawbat al-shaykh Abū al-Fatḥ ḥafaẓahu Allāh tawqīt Muḥammad ibn', "Purchased in Cairo, 1933/34. Owners' marks: on p. [1], fī nawbat al-faqīr ilá Allāh taʻālá Jalāl al-Dīn Muḥammad Muḥammad al-Ramlī; on p. [1], malakahu min faḍl rabbihi jalla wa-ʻala al-faqīr Muḥammad ibn Sakīkar[?] ibn ...[?]; on p. [90], bi-mā kāna tārīkh al-hijrah al-nabawīyah ... fī sanat aḥad wa-sittīn wa-tisʻumiyah kāna awwal Ramaḍān al-mubajjal al-muʻaẓẓam qadarahu yawm al-ithnayn [1554] wa-kāna fī al-jāmiʻ al-Umawī nawbat al-shaykh Barakāt ...; on lower right", 'Couplet on p. [1] addressed to potential borrowers: A-yā mustaʻīr al-kutub daʻnī/fa-inna iʻāratī lil-kutub ʻār/fa-maʻshūqī min al-dunyā kitābī/fa-hal samiʻtum bi-maʻshūqin yuʻār.', 'Title and text rubricated; corrections and extensive marginal notes in hand of copyist and others.', 'Date in colophon: wāfaqa al-farāgh min nuskhatihā ...[?]... li-Rajab[?] min shuhūr sanat 900 [March-April 1495].', '"An extensive treatise on the sine quadrant also dealing with sundials, arranged in 60 bābs." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 66.', 'The introduction of this work is a "brief, independent treatise in which the author sets forth the basic ideas (mainly definitions) of geometry and spherical astronomy. The rest of the work (60 chapters) is mostly concerned with problems regarding the transformation of coordinates with the dastūr quadrant." M. Plessner, "al-Māridīnī," in Encyclopedia of Islam (Leiden, 1989), v. vi, pp. 542b-543a.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 953', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at close, transcription completed 28 Jumādá I 1261 [ca. 4 June 1845] with a note indicating that the exemplar for this copy was a manuscript of the author. A gloss in the margin adjacent to the colophon appears to be dated, indicating that the gloss was entered 18 Shawwāl 1306, corresponding to 15 Buʼūnah 1605 and 16 June 1889.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 102', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in purple coated paper (embossed with scrolling vegetal design) with red leather over spine, fore edge flap and edges / turn-ins (paper faced, leather edged framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted wove paper ; sewn in heavy white thread, two stations, failing toward center ; worked chevron endbands in dark blue and cream, fairly good condition though primaries compromised and core coming away from tailband ; overall in somewhat poor condition with cover almost fully detached at spine (adhesive has failed and spine lining has torn where primaries sewn through), abrasion, staining, losses of paper, minor pest damage, etc.', 'Support: European (specifically Venetian made by the Galvani firm) laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 30-32 mm. apart (horizontal), watermark of crescent (with human profile) in shield (pp.30, 32, 36, etc. and compare Walz, The Paper trade of Egypt and the Sudan, 88-9) and countermark of "V G" (see pp.28, 34, 46, etc.), quite sturdy, light cream in color, well-burnished ; table of contents at opening on two different machine wove papers ; replacement leaves (carrying pp.85-88, 125-126, 131-132, 203-204) also in a different paper ; some staining.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; two elegant Egyptian hands ; opening hand (through p.118) in a medium line, mainly serifless with effect of tilt to the left, slight effect of words descending to baseline (occasional more exaggerated), curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ ; other main hand (p.119 to close) in a narrow line, partially seriffed with small leftward serifs on occasional ascender (usually free-standing alif), slight effect of inclination to the left, spacious with some elongation of horizontal strokes, curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah usually pointed as yāʼ ; text of replacement leaves (pp.85-88, 125-126, 131-132, 203-204) in still a different hand.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: V-4+3 (9), III-2 (13), 4 V(53), III (59), 7 V(129), IV (137), 10 V(237), IV (245), IV-3 (250) ; mainly quinions with occasional ternion or quaternion ; catchwords present ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: Triangular, reads "وكان الفراغ من نسخ هذه السفينة يوم الثلاث المبارك ثمانية وعشرين خلت من شهر جماد اول الذي هو من شهور سنة ١٢٦١ احدى وستون ومائتين والف من هجرة من له العز والشرف صلى الله عليه وعلى اله تم ١٢٦١ نقلت هذه النسخة عن اصل نسخة المؤلف "', 'Explicit: "واذا اجرت بالاماني فيه ارخها سفينة البحر بسم الله مجرها', 'Incipit: "حمد لمن حكم على اهل الهوى بالنوى والفراق فصاروا بحيث لو صحوا بالحجاز اسمعوا من في العراق ... وبعد فلما ان كانت الارواح تتروح بالطرب واللهو وترتاح لاستماع الاغاني في مجالس الصفو والزهو ... وسميتها سفينة الملك ونفيسة الفلك ورتبتها على ثلاثة انابير صغير ووسط وكبير ..."', "Title from 'title page' inscription.", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the collection of over 350 song texts (muwashshaḥāt) by Muḥammad Shihāb al-Dīn (d.1857), arranged in larger suites (waṣlāt). Lengthy table of contents at opening outlines the muwashshaḥāt and their corresponding rhythmic types (ḍurūb) within their waṣlāt and musical modes (maqām).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 585', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.727 (partially lost due to page repair), copied by ʻAlī Riz̤ā ibn Ḥājjī Mīrzā ʻAlī Hazārʹcharbī with transcription completed 15 Rabīʻ II 1048 [ca. 26 August 1638].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- c. Numerous inserts carrying notes, verses, etc., text of many in Persian, several in shikastah-nastaʻlīq, a few tinted blue, some once folded (paginated, pp.173-174, 207-208, 235-236, 343-344, 345-346, 393-394, 565-566, 585-586, 681-682, 683-684, 685-686, and 731-732).', 'Former shelfmark: From spine label, interior of upper cover and front flyleaf (p.1), "IL 169a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in yellow-tinted laid paper ; now sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in cream and light pink, good condition though with some damage to tailband ; overall in somewhat poor condition with much abrasion, lifting of spine leather, staining, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper mainly with 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly distinct) and no chain lines visible [?], thin and transluscent though sturdy, quite well-burnished, cloudy formation, deep beige in color ; another much denser and thicker type, also lighter in color with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. also appears (see p.88, etc.) ; extensive pages repairs to opening and closing sections in a crisp brown wove paper marked with \'imitation watermark\' or embossed mark, "BATH" (see pp.3-4, pp.15-16, pp.725-726).', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings often rubricated (in some sections simply large and bolded in same black ink).', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Persianate hand, varying slightly in size and line thickness ; at opening, compact and mainly serifless with marked tilt to the left, many open counters, curvilinear descenders (some sweeping, i.e. final nūn, qāf, etc.), pointing in conjoined dots, some free assimilation of letters, kāf occasionally represented as vertical stroke with miniature kāf seated above ; from p.81 (where layout also changes from 18 to 14 lines per page), quite similar, initially partially seriffed, fairly vertical and generously spaced, while toward middle and close of the codex becoming increasingly compact, more frequently seriffed, with slight tilt to the left, subtle effect of words descending to baseline, and sweeping descenders.', 'Layout: Written in 18 and 14 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV (8), III+1 (15), 16 IV(143), III (149), 25 IV(349), I+1 (352), i ; chiefly quaternions ; pages between sections left blank (first juzʼ ends on p.306 and second juzʼ opens with Kitāb al-Nikāḥ on p.308) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and some inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "والحمد لله وقع الفراغ من تسويد هذا الكتاب الشريف وقت الظهر يوم الخميس خامس عشر شهر ربيع الاخر المعظم [؟] في شهور سنة ثمان واربعين والف من هجرة النبوية لاضعف عباد الله واحوجهم الى رحمة الله الملك العالي على رضا ابن حاجى ميرزا على هزار چربى اللهم حرم يديه على النار واحشره مع الائمة الابرار"', 'Explicit: "ولو قيل يعقل عصبة [عصبته] المسلمون كان حسنا لان ميراثه له [لهم] على الاصح وحيث آتينا بما قصدناه ووفينا بما وعدناه فالحمد لله الذي جعلنا عند تبدد الاهواء وتعدد الاراء من المتمسكين بمذهب اعظم العلماء ... وان يجعلنا من خلصاء شيعتهم الداخلين في شفاعتهم انه ولي ذلك والقادر عليه"', 'Incipit: "اللهم ان احمدك حمدا يقل في انتشاره حمد كل حامد ويضمحل باشتهاده جحد كل جاحد ... اما بعد فان رعاية الايمان توجب قضاء حق الاخوان ... ومن الاصحاب من عرفت الايمان من شأنه ... سألني ان املي عليه مختصرا في الاحكام ... متضمن رؤوس مسائل الحلال والحرام ..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the authoritative work on Shīʻī law by al-Muḥaqqiq al-Ḥillī (Muḥaqqiq-i Ḥillī), Najm al-Dīn Jaʻfar ibn Ḥasan (d.1277).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 912', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.475, transcription prior to final naṣīḥah completed 25 Shaʻbān 1354, corresponding to 22 November 1935. As appears in colophon on margin of p.481, transcription through closing naṣīḥah completed 26 Shaʻbān 1354, corresponding to 23 November 1935. Likely bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 61', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "شرح الاشارات | نصير الدين الطوسى | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, modern hand in a bold line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, effect of inclination to the right, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 25-26 lines per page.', 'Collation: Pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "يقول الكاتب وليكن هذا اخر ما كتبناه من كتاب الاشارات وشرحه وقد كان هذا في ٢٥ من شعبان سنه ١٣٥٤ه الموافق ٢٢ من نوفمبر سنه ١٩٣٥م وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل نعم المولى ونعم النصير وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم" and "رقم في ٢٦ شعبان ١٣٥٤ه يوم السبت المبارك الموافق ٢٣ نوفمبر ١٩٣٥م"', 'Explicit: "وهو الكفيل بعقاب الجناة والمجرمين والمتولي لحساب الخلائق اجمعين في كل صغير وكبير ... قال الشارح العلامة وهذا اخر فصول هذا الكتاب وما تيسر لي من حل مشكلات كتاب الاشارات والتنبيهات ... والله ولي السداد والرشاد ومنه المبتدا واليه المعاد"', 'Incipit: "هذا الكتاب هو شرح الاشارات لعمدة المحققين وزبدة المدققين المعروف بخوجه نصير الدين عليه رحمة رب العالمين قال الشيخ الرئيس المصنف هذه اشارات الى اصول وتنبيهات على جمل يستبصر بها من تيسرت له يسير لها ولا ينتفع بالاصرح منها من تعسرت عليه والتكلان على التوفيق ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy of the commentary by Naṣīr al-Dīn al-Ṭūsī (d.1274) on Ibn Sīnā's (d.1037) al-Ishārāt wa-al-tanbīhāt."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 545', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.173, copied by Muṣṭafá ibn Khalīl with transcription completed 13 Ramaḍān 974 [ca. 24 March 1567] in Ḥimṣ (Homs or Emesa).', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.1-2) -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 219" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in a once light-blue tinted laid paper (see envelope flap) with red-brown leather over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins (framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings (doublures) in yellow-tinted laid paper with simple symmetrical cross cut-out design over blue paper, hinges in dark brown to black leather ; upper and lower covers carry simple cut-out design over dark yellow or tan paper in a symmetrical floral ornament ; design continues on flap ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations ; endbands gone ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion (losses of pigment), lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, staining, some spine slant (spine slightly cocked), etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), single chain lines spaced 27-30 mm. apart (horizontal), anchor in circle watermark with six-pointed star above (roughly 65 mm. tall, see p.6, 39, etc.) ; countermarks include "S R" with trefoil above (see p.8, 15, etc.) and "P B" with trefoil above (see p.35, possibly different paper though measurements very similar) ; sized and burnished though not excessively smooth, sturdy and thick though crisp, dingy cream color.', 'Decoration: Keywords and text being commented upon rubricated (text otherwise executed in brown ink) ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas.', 'Script: Naskh ; bold, compact (letters spaced very close together) Syrian hand in a medium line ; virtually serifless (though occasional right-sloping head-serifs irregularly appear) with slight effect of tilt to the right, exaggerated thickness and some elongation of horizontal strokes, descenders somewhat flattened, mainly closed counters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, free assimilation of letters (especially wāw with following lām, etc.), final nūn of من reversed (re-curved), yāʼ of في often mardūdah, sweeping shaqq on kāf (even final), occasional hāʼ looking like two inverted commas one atop the other.', 'Layout: Written in 20 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation : V (10), V+1 (21), 6 V(81), III (87) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and mistakenly skips over two pages between pp.99-100).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تم الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب وهو حسبي واليه المآب على يد اضعف العباد الراجي رحمة ربه الجليل مصطفى بن خليل في نهار الاثنين المبارك يوم ثالث عشر من رمضان المبارك من شهور سنة ۹۷۴ في مدينة حمص حرصها الله تعالى من الخلافة والمحنة ... والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Explicit: "اذا صبر في هذين القسمين حتى قتل صار شهيدا لانه يكون بادلا نفسه لاعزاز الدين واقامة حق الشرع"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعل الاصول شرعه منارا اي منار وافاض على من اختار [اختاره] انوار كشف الاسرار ... وبعد فيقول الفقير الى الله الغني عبد الرحمن بن ابي بكر بن العيني ... لما رأيت المختصر المسمى بالمنار في اصول الفقه للامام العلامة حافظ الملة والدين ابي البركات النسفي ... كتابا لم ير مثله في الاصول وما كتب عليه من الشروح ... اردت ان الخص عليه شرحا سالكا طريق الاختصار ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.5).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the commentary upon al-Manār fī uṣūl al-fiqh (Manār al-anwār), a concise account of the foundations of law by Abū al-Barakāt ʻAbd Allāh ibn Aḥmad al-Nasafī (d.1310).'])

en: (count: ['On p. [10], illuminated ʻunwān; text rubricated and enclosed in gold borders; marginal commentaries in hand of copyist; on pp. [5-8], table of contents supplied in another hand; vol. has edge title.', "Dates of composition and copying, provenances, and copyist's name in colophon: waqaʻa al-farāgh min taʼlīfihi yawm al-sabt qarīb al-ʻaṣr min awāʼil Shawwāl sanat sabaʻ wa-thamānīmiʼah [i.e. April 1405] ...[?]... Samarqand ... wa-qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min tanmīqihi qurb al-ḍuḥá min thalath ʻashar al-Ṣafar ... sanat thamān wa-khamsīn wa-thamānimiʼah [i.e. 12 February 1454] fī baladat Shīrāz ... ʻalá yad ... Muḥamamd ibn Muḥammad al-Ṭ[?].", '"al-Mawāqif fī ʻilm al-kalām, a theological work, by ʻAḍud al-Dīn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Aḥmad al-Ījī with running commentary by some unnamed person. Many commentaries exist." Cataloging by William Hoyt Worrell, 1925.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 244', 'Origin: In colophon, attributed to "Ḥamd Allāh al-maʻrūf bi-Ibn al-Shaykh," Şeyh Hamdullah of Amasya, with date of transcription is not specified. Colophon is questionable though attribution for most of the kıta\'lar is likely accurate would suggest completion in the late 15th or early 16th century. Pieced and mounted at a later date, even late 16th or 17th century, with some repairs and replacements supplied.', 'Former shelfmark: "335 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" on verso of final panel ; "100" inscriped in pencil at opening.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather ; hinged together with red-brown leather in accordion format ; doublures in dark slate blue leather with border and area of mandorla and cornerpieces (on reverse) gold-flecked and lined in gold ; upper and lower covers carry superb stamped and gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal decoration, compare Déroche class. NSd 7), pendants and cornerpieces, along with gold-painted accents and tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps approaching a guilloché roll ; overall in good condition with only minor abrasion and lifting of leather at board edges.', 'Support: Well-burnished laid paper (repaired in many places) pieced and set into an elaborate frame of decorative papers, the outermost being richly colored marbled paper of several types and adjacent to it a border of pieced colored papers, some also gold-flecked ; other decorative papers fill the remaining areas surrounding the text ; specimens and borders mounted on leaves of well-burnished European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Gold-flecked or painted decorative papers often flank lower panel carrying lines of naskh ; written area (and panels within) surrounded by frames consisting of gold and red-orange rules ; textual dividers in the form of illuminated rosettes.', 'Script: Exquisite specimen of Ottoman calligraphy ; large line of each page in thuluth ; lines of each page in naskh ; fully vocalized ; each continues a distinct stream of text.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 6 or 9 lines per page, a large line of thuluth and 5 or 8 compact lines of naskh (alternating pages carrying 5 or 8 lines) with lines in thuluth and those in naskh constituting two distinct streams of text ; written area divided into upper panel accommodating the large line and centered lower panel accommodating the more compact lines ; 8 lines of naskh mainly written on the diagonal.', "Collation: Twelve 'panels' hinged together in accordion format ; panels are numbered on the verso with Hindu-Arabic numerals in black ink beginning with ٣.", 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads: "كتبها حمد الله المعروف بابن الشيخ حامدا الله تعالى على نعمه ومصليا على نبيه محمد واله الطيبين الطاهرين اجمعين"', 'Explicit: [thuluth] "الخط الحسن نزهة العين وريحانة القلوب انه ولي الهداية والتوفيق" ; [naskh] "اذا استشرت الجاهل اختار لك الباطل"', 'Incipit: [thuluth] "بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم قال النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم سئل كسرى انوشروان ما ..." ; [naskh] "بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم وبه ثقتي وسئل كسرى ما بالكم اليوم اذ كنتم احق بتعليم الناس اشد استغلالا بالتعلم ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Superb album of calligraphy (muraqqaʻ or murakkaa) employing mainly hadīth pertaining to sentiments of Kisrá Anūshirvān (Khosrow or Khusraw I, d.579), with most of the kıt'alar executed by the celebrated Ottoman calligrapher Şeyh Hamdullah of Amasya (d.1520)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 530', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.182, copied by Ḥājjī Muḥammad ibn Ḥājjī Sinān (Hacı Mehmet bin Hacı Sinan) with transcription completed 4 [?] Dhū al-Ḥijjah 986 [ca. 1 February 1579].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2) -- b.Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 64b" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in once yellow-tinted laid paper (see flap) with dark brown leather over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins (framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations, many threads broken ; overall in somewhat poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; repairs to spine and fore edge flap in tan leather.', 'Support: European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), watermark of anchor in circle with six-pointed star above (65 mm. tall, see p.170, 179, etc.), and "T C" under trefoil countermark (see p.181) ; sturdy though crisp ; well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Keywords rubricated ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by frame consisting of gold band outlined by black fillets ; textual dividers in the form of letter hāʼ in red.', "Script: Naskh ; clear 'Syrian' or Turkish hand, small and compact ; mainly serifless, rounded with curvilinear descenders, very slight effect of tilt to the left, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, etc.", 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 8 V(80), IV+1 (89) ; almost exclusively quinions ; front flyleaf now affixed to opening leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "قد وقع الفراغ من هذا الشرح المبارك في شهر ذي الحجة في يوم اربع في تاريخ سنة ٩٨۶ على يد العبد الفقير الحقير حاجي محمد ابن حاجي سنان غفر الله له ولوالديه ... تمت"', 'Explicit: "ثم اعتقادي مذهب النعماني والى الخير والصلاح نقطع الكلام راجين من الله الفلاح والنور بالنجاح انه هو الوهاب الفتاح وشاركين حامدين على تمام التوضيح انه هو المشكور على افاضة نعمه والمسؤول خاتمة السعادة بفضله وكرمه ... حسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل تمت"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على رسوله محمد واله وعلى جميع رسل الله وانبيائه ... وبعد يقول الفقير الى رحمة ربه الغني مصطفى بن زكريا ابن ايدغرمش القرماني ... لما رأيت مختصر مقدمة الصلاة المنسوب تأليفه الى الشيخ الامام ختم المجتهدين ... نصر بن محمد الفقيه ابي الليث السمرقندي ... قد اشتهر فيما بين الانام بركاته وشملتهم فوائده ... اردت ان اكتب له شرحا تحل مشكلاته ويفصل مجملاته ... فسميته التوضيح وسألت الله ان ينفع به كما نفع باصله ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of al-Tawḍīḥ (التوضيح), the commentary by Muṣṭafá ibn Zakarīyā ibn Aydughmish al-Qaramānī (d.1406) on al-Muqaddimah fī al-ṣalāh, a work on jurisprudential issues pertaining to the canonical prayer (ṣalāh, ṣalāt) by Abū al-Layth al-Samarqandī (d.993).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 598', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.282, completed 10 Ramaḍān 1120 [ca. 23 November 1708] (likely referring to transcription of replacements, though possibly referencing the original transcription or even a misreading of the date of composition) ; paper in bulk of codex suggests 18th century transcription.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip (on recycled card) in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 205" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in tan leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla, pendants and cornerpieces (each filled with vegetal composition), along with tooled rosette accents and border in a series of s-shaped stamps flanked by rules ; sewn in pink thread, two stations, mainly gone ; textblock completely detached (or perhaps never attached, ill-fitting and likely not original), cover serves more as a wrapper ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion and lifting of leather, some pest damage, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 12-13 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 20-21 mm. apart (horizontal), grapes with name "B GAILLIARDON" and crown above (see pp.30-31, compare Raisin no.30 A, pp.28-29, 387 in Velkov, Les Filigranes dans les documents Ottomans, appearing in a ms. transcribed in Istanbul, 1749) ; quite thin though sturdy, fairly transluscent, dark cream in color ; replacement leaves (see pp.41-80, 279-282) in brown wove paper ; extensive pest damage ; many repairs in same wove paper as replacements.', 'Decoration: Keywords, text being commented upon, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', "Script: Naskh ; elegant 'Syrian' or Egyptian hand [?] in a thin to medium line ; partially seriffed with small right-sloping head-serifs appearing irregularly on free-standing alif and lām, elongation of horizontal strokes, exaggerated thickness of some horizontal strokes, curvilinear descenders (some sweeping), pointing in conjoined dots or strokes (stroke for three dots looking like reversed hamzah), final nūn with dot set deep in bowl, kāf often written as vertical stroke with miniature kāf (looking like hamzah) seated above,free assimilation of letters ; replacement sections supplied in a different, possibly Egyptian hand (see pp.41-80, 279-282).", 'Layout: Written mainly in 25 lines per page ; mainly single column, but divided to two column to set off poetry.', 'Collation: 13 V(130), V-1 (139), I (141) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "نجز شرح الفية الحافظ عبد الرحيم العراقي في سيرة النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم للشرف عبد الروف المناوي قرن مصر [العصر؟] يوم السبت العاشر من شهر رمضان المعظم سنة عشرين ومائة والف بحمد الله وعونه تم رضي الله تعالى عنه ونفعنا به وبعلومه امين امين تم"', 'Explicit: "وقول الناظم والولي بشد الياء اي الناصر وال فيه للاستفراق اي وعلى كل الانصار والله سبحانه وتعالى اعلم بالصواب وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم تسليما كثيرا دائما ابدا ... والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي شرح الصدور بنظم شمل الاسلام وسيرته ... وبعد فهذه عجالة سنية على الفية السيرة النبوية الحاوية مع ذلك للمعجزات والخصائص المصطوفية نظم جدنا الاعلى من قبل الام زين الاسلام حافظ مصر والحرمين والشام عبد الرحيم العراقي الشافعي رحمه الله ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.1) and opening matter (preface) on p.2.", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine (though damaged) copy of the commentary on Alfīyat al-sīrah al-Nabawīyah, or Naẓm al-durar al-sanīyah fī al-siyar al-zakīyah, a biography of the Prophet in verse, by ʻAbd al-Raḥīm ibn al-Ḥusayn al-ʻIrāqī (d.1404).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 685', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.123b (p.246), transcription of first work finished ("qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min taḥrīrih wa-tanmīqih...") in latter Ṣafar, 1021 [April 1612] ; name of copyist is unclear, though he appears to have been muʼadhdhin (müezzin) in the Gazi Ali Bey mosque, likely of Vučitrn [Vıçıtırın], Kosovo. As appears in colophon on fol.179a (p.357), transcription of second work finished on the first of Muḥarram 1029 [ca. 8 December 1619] ; name of copyist (and perhaps also place of transcription) was recorded but later effaced and now illegible.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From spine label and inscription on fol.1a (p.1), "IL 215" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Heavy, thick, dark brown leather without boards (limp binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; upper and lower cover bear blind-tooled border and diamond design (slightly off-center) in four cross-like rosettes ; same cross-like rosettes appear in decorative border along upper and outer lengths of the cover ; entire design appears some what off-center, as though cover was decorated for larger codex and then cut to fit this ms. ; exposed interior of leather covers serve as "doublures" ; sewn in blue thread, two stations ; in fair condition, though quite worn, with leather cracked and abraded, but still well-attached to text block.', 'Support: European laid paper with laid lines running vertically spaced roughly 8 laid lines per cm., chain lines (horizontal) spaced 27-28 mm. apart, and watermark of anchor in circle (single line) with leaf or trefoil above (see p.6, 12, 256, etc.), sturdy, heavily burnished ; same paper appears to have been used for both works ; countermark "B C" below trefoil is visible in p.254, etc.', 'Decoration: Textual dividers in the form of red discs, three dots, etc. appear throughout ; text rubricated with textual dividers, overlinings (marking transcribed verse being commented upon, etc.), and section headings ("بيت" introducing verse, "رحمه", etc.) in red.', 'Script: Copied in two distinct hands, one for each work, though hand at close of opening work is similar to that of second work and possibly supplied by the same copyist: [1] Naskh ; Turkish / Balkan hand ; virtually serifless with mainly closed counters, kāf mashkūlah preferred, final kāf having kāf ṣaghīrah (hamzah-like form) repeated twice, in typical position and above the vertical stroke ; occasional extremely slight effect of words descending to baseline and final letters or final word of line superscript ; [2] Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; Turkish / Balkan hand ; virtually serifless, though a left-sloping head serif on lām of definite article rarely appears, strong effect of words descending to baseline, final letters or words superscript or line curving up, mainly closed counters, point of final or free-standing nūn set down in or near return stroke of tall, wide bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; impression of ruling board evident.', 'Collation: V-1 (9), 7 V (79), III+1 (86), I (88), 3 V (118), IV (126), 5 V (176), II (180) ; chiefly quinions ; copy is acephelous with first leaf of first quire missing ; several leaves between the two works and following the second are left blank (though without loss of text) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during cataloguing).', 'Colophon: [1] Scribal, triangular, reads: "قد وقع الفراغ من تحريره وتنميقه عن يد [اضعف؟] العباد الله هدايته [؟] الله عن قصه بلون [؟] المؤذن بجامع غازي على بيك تحريرا في اواخر صفر المظفر في يوم خميس في وقت الظهر سنة احدى وعشرين والف من هجرة النبوية عليه افضل التحية م م م" ; [2] Scribal, triangular, reads: "تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب في يوم الاحد من الشهر المحرم الحرام الشريف في وقت العصر سنة تسع وعشرين والف من هجرة النبوية عليه افضل التحية كتبه الحقير هدايته الله ..."', 'Explicit: [1] توفيق حقه رفيق اولوب آلت اولمغه سعى اتمك كركدر والسلام تمت النسخة الشريفة المباركة [المسمى] بشرح جزيرة المثنوي المكين [؟] بلمحات لمعات المثنوي وهي مرآت للسالكين ... وهو الله في السماء والارض لا اله الا هو عليه توكلت وهو رب العرش العظيم [2] رحمه ما دام كه اغح[؟] بود غن دبره در باد صبا ياخود سو ندرردوه حادي نغمتي تمت', 'Incipit: [1] صلوات صافيات وتحيات وافيات بي غايات اول شاه كزيده [2] الحمد لله الذي جعل النظام لانتظام الكلام والصلوة والسلام على محمد سيد الانام وعلى اله العظام واصحابه الكرام وبعد بو عبد فقير ورق حقير قليل البضاعة عديم البراعة حضرت فخر العابدين قطب الواصلين الموفق من عند الله رب العالمين شيخ سعد الله الخلوتي', 'Title from inscription on fol.1a.', 'Ms. codex.', '4. fol. 179b-fol.180b : [blank].', '2. fol. 127a-fol.179a : Şerh-i kaside-yi Bürde/ Şeyh Sadullah Halvetî.', '2. fol.124a-fol.126b : [blank].', '1. fol.1a-123b : Şerh-i Cezire-yi Mesnevi/ Bağdadlı İlmî Dede.', "Two works, the first being İlmî Dede's Turkish commentary on on the Persian Jazīrah-i Mas̲navī, a selection by Yusuf Sinaneddin Sineçak (d.953/1546) of 360 verses from Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī's Mas̲navī and the second being Şeyh Sadullah Halvetî's Turkish commentary on al-Būṣirī's (d.694/1294) Arabic poem in praise of the Prophet Muḥammad, al-Burdah, or al-Kawākib al-durrīyah fī madḥ Khayr al-barīyah. Copy is acephelous with first leaf of first quire missing."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 529', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.300, copied by Aḥmad ibn Abī Bakr al-Manhalī al-Azharī al-Shāfiʻī with transcription completed ("wa-kāna al-farāgh min kitābatih...") 23 Rajab 870 [ca. 11 March 1466].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.1-2) -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 64" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in olive green leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in yellow surface-dyed European laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Dèroche class. OAi2) and pendants with tooled annulet accents and tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps flanked by fillets ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and cream, fair condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, slight negative draw in upper cover, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, quite diffuse) and chain lines grouped in threes with roughly 7-9 mm. between chains and 47-50 mm. between groups (vertical) ; well-sized and burnished ; some staining and losses to pests.', "Decoration: Elegant illuminated titlepiece on 'title page' (p.7) in white, gold, red, and blue consisting of two rectangular panels, each with lozenge set among three roundels carrying the title and benediction for the author in white with gold outline and red accents on field of blue, separated by an eight-lobed medallion (shamsah) carrying the author's name in white with gold outline on a field of red with blue accents, all set off by arabesque designs in gold on fields of red and blue and ansae in the form of roundels (accompanying the rectangular panels) and an almond-shaped piece (accompanying the medallion) ; illuminated anepigraphic tailpiece at close on p.300 consisting of rectangular piece filled with almond-shapes formed of the intersection of arcs in white and gold, filled with floral decoration (approaching arabesque) in gold on fields of red and blue and accompanied by ansa in the form of a roundel ; keywords rubricated ; textual divders in the form of inverted commas in red.", "Script: Naskh, characteristically Mamlūk ; fine Egyptian or 'Syrian' hand in a medium line ; serifless, fairly large and spacious, somewhat stiff with some elongation of horizontal strokes, occasional sweeping descenders (mainly final nūn, yāʼ, etc.), foot of isolated lām seated flatly on the baseline with foot of final joined lām descending below the baseline (still quite flat), bowl of final and isolated nūn usually abbreviated (with scarcely a continuing upstroke), pointing in distinct dots ; extensively vocalized.", 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V-1 (9), 13 V(139), V-1 (148), i ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "وكان الفراغ من كتابته يوم الثلثاء ثالث عشرين شهر رجب الفرد عام سبعين وثمانمائة على يد الفقير الى ربه القدير احمد بن ابي بكر المنهلي الازهري الشافعي ختم الله له بخير ولمالكه ولقارئه وللناظر فيه ولمستمعه والمسلمين اجمعين"', 'Explicit: "ثم اعتقادي مذهب النعمان والى الخير والصلاح بقطع الكلام راجين من الله الفلاح والفوز بالنجاح انه هو الوهاب الفتاح وشاركين حامدين على تمام التوضيح انه هو المشكور على افاضة نعمه والمسؤك خاتمة السعادة بفضله وكرمه والصلاة والتسليم على اشرف الخلق سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين والحمد لله وحده تم الكتاب بأسره وبعون الله يسره"', 'Incipit: " الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على رسوله محمد واله وعلى جميع رسل الله وانبيائه ... وبعد يقول الفقير الى رحمة ربه الغني مصطفى بن زكريا ابن ايدغرمش القرماني ... لما رأيت مختصر مقدمة الصلاة المنسوب تأليفه الى الشيخ الامام قطب المتهجدين ... نصر بن محمد الفقيه ابي الليث السمرقندي ... قد اشتهر فيما بين الانام بركاته وشملتهم فوائده ... اردت ان اكتب له شرحا تحل مشكلاته ويفصل مجملاته ... فسميته التوضيح وسألت الله ان ينفع به كما نفع باصله ..."', "Title from titlepiece on 'title page' (p.7).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of al-Tawḍīḥ (التوضيح), the commentary by Muṣṭafá ibn Zakarīyā ibn Aydughmish al-Qaramānī (d.1406) on al-Muqaddimah fī al-ṣalāh, a work on jurisprudential issues pertaining to the canonical prayer (ṣalāh, ṣalāt) by Abū al-Layth al-Samarqandī (d.993). Includes table of contents on added leaf (p.6).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 681', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.693, copied by Muḥammad Ḥusayn ibn Sayyid Muḥammad Shāh al-Ḥusaynī al-Marʻashī Shūshtarī with transcription completed 18 Muḥarram 1062 [ca. 31 December 1651]. As appears in following authorial colophon (also on p.693), composition completed 16 Ṣafar 681 [ca. 26 May 1282] in Kāshghar.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- c. Slip of blue laid paper ("KFNT 1863" watermark visible) with excerpts in Persian (paginated pp.108-110) -- d. Slip of light blue wove paper with listing of book titles (paginated pp.145-146) -- e. Slip of untinted wove paper with notes (paginated pp.329-330).', 'Former shelfmark: From upper doublure and spine label, "IL 236" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', "Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in brown leather ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal decoration, compare Déroche class. OSd) and pendants, along with tooled rule border ; sewn in cream thread, two stations, many threads broken ; manuscript 'waste' guards on many bifolia ; worked chevron endbands in light green and cream, fairly good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with some abrasion, staining, lower board severely compromised (failure of the adhesive, full delamination and losses of pasteboard material) and now quite soft, cover detached at spine with most gatherings loose, etc. ; housed in box for protection.", "Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper, possibly of more than one type ; mainly with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (vertical, curving) and chain lines faintly visible, possibly in occasional groups (horizontal) ; opposite orientation of laid and chain lines in many central bifolia (i.e. the central bifolium of many gatherings) ; beige in color, quite transluscent, sturdy, well-burnished (burnisher's marks visible), cloudy formation, inclusions ; some staining and tide lines ; flyleaves and some repairs in European laid (with three crescents watermark) and wove paper ; some repairs and fills in non-European (likely Persian or Indian laid paper).", 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, notabilia (side-heads), and some abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh ; small, neat and compact Persianate hand ; partially but irregularly seriffed with quite small left-sloping head-serif on most ascenders (even free standing alif) and occasionally on shaqq of kāf, fairly vertical with only slight effect of tilt to the left, rounded with curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: iv, 42 IV(336), II (340), iv ; almost exclusively quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of ٢ in opposite outer corners ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمت الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب على يد عبد الفقير الحقير اضعف عباد الله الراجي الى رحمة الله محمد حسين بن سيد محمد شاه الحسيني المرعشي شوشتري غفر الله له ولوالديه ولمن قرأ ونظر في يوم الاثنين ثامن عشر شهر محرم الحرام سنه اثنى وستين والف من الهجرة النبوية صلى الله عليه واله وسلم تم تم تم" ; "Authorial," reads "وكان الفراغ من تصنيفه وتأليفه ... توفيق الله وحسن تأيده وظهر الثلثاء السادس عشر من صفر سنه احدى وثمانين وستمائة بكاشغر"', 'Explicit: "قال ذو الرمة الا يا اسلمي يا ذا رمي على البلي ولا زال منهلا بجر [؟] عائك القطر"', 'Incipit: "قال الفقير الى مولاه الغني ... ابو الفضل محمد بن عمر بن خالد المدعو بجمال القرشي ... احمد الله وهو المحمود بكل اللغات وجلها واشكره وهو المشكور على كثر الهبات وقلها ... وبعد فان صحاح اللغة دواء الغلة [؟] لسقام الجهل وشقاء العلة لذوي النهل ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.11).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the abridgement and rendering into Persian by Abū al-Faz̤l Muḥammad ibn ʻUmar ibn Khālid Jamāl al-Qarshī of the renowned Arabic lexicon, Tāj al-lughah wa-ṣiḥāḥ al-ʻArabīyah, commonly known as al-Ṣiḥāḥ, by Abū Naṣr Ismāʻīl ibn Ḥammād al-Jawharī (d.1009?).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 904', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: "In manila envelope marked: \'Islamic ms./unacc./Tadhkirat al-nisyan fi akhbar muluk al- Sudan./Arabic. 18th century./North African [Maghribi] script.\'" - from handlist prepared by R. Dougherty, 1993.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 53', 'Binding: Boards covered in red brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in beige paper, decoratively trimmed to accent interior of spine and fore edge flap ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped central mandorla (with blue-green paper onlays) as well as blind-tooled accents (including rectangular stamps and rosettes at corners with light brown leather onlays), pendants and border (in a series of rules and vegetal stamps) ; design continues on flap ; cover likely made to serve as a wrapper binding though possibly for a larger text block, certainly serves as a wrapper for the unsewn leaves of this current text block (possibly recycled wrapper binding) ; overall in somewhat poor condition with large loss to board in lower cover, other staining and abrasion, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 21-22 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of crown above cartouche with "I B" [?] and bell below (see p.4, 34, 90, 110, 134, 154, 182, etc. and compare nos. 335, 336, 339, etc. in Gaudriault, Filigranes et autres caractéristiques de papiers fabriqués en France aux XVIIe et XVIIIe siècles), beige in color, thin and transluscent though sturdy ; in poor condition with ink burn to break-through, staining, tears and some significant losses.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings in bolded dark brown ink, others entered in yellow, green, orange or red (rubricated), still others simply accented with yellow, red, etc.', 'Script: Maghribī ; mainly serifless with dramatic effect of tilt to the right, spur-like tail on alif of prolongation, sweeping descenders, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page.', 'Collation: Any original gatherings no longer intact ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام على سيد المرسلين وعلى اله ... الطيبين واصحابه الفضلاء الطاهرين وبعد فقد رسمنا اسماء الباش [الباشات] على ترتيب حروف الهجاء التي اولها الالف واخرها الياء ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful (though damaged) copy of the anonymous biographical dictionary of the pashas of Timbuktu (Tombouctou) completed in 1751, itself a rearrangement of the history Dīwān al-mulūk fī salāṭīn al-sūdān. Contribution to the cataloguing from Hossein Mottaghi. "Briefly described and importance of text analyzed by Professor Andrew Ehrenkreutz, June 1967 (his essay in Islamic MSS administrative file, Special Collections department). The item in hand is for some reason identified as "Munajjed no. 1" in the handwriting of a librarian(?) on this essay. No such identification exists on the item itself."- from handlist prepared by R. Dougherty, 1993.'])

en: (count: ['In Maghribī script.', 'Text and title rubricated; marginal corrections in hand of copyist (same as that of Mich. Isl. Mss. 797,2-5).', "Date and copyist's name in colophon: kamala ... ʻalá yad kātibihi li-nafsihi thumma li-man shāʾa Allāh min baʻdihi al-muḥtāj ilá luṭf rabbihi al-khafī Muḥammad ibn Muṣṭafá al-Azharī al-Ḥanafī fī sanat 1045.", '[88-91].', '[5] Arithmetical treatise, pp. [50-54]; [6] Wa-fī al-Maʻūnah li-Ibn al-Hāyim ..., p. [55]; [7] ʻAbd Allāh ibn Ḥajjāj ibn al-Yāsamīn, Lammā badat lī al-judhūr mughlaqah naẓamtu fī ajnāsatihā al-muḥaqqaqah urjūzah ..., pp. [56-57]; [8] ʻAlī ibn Aḥmad, Fa-qad saʾalanī ... al-sayyid ʻAbd Allāh ibn Saʻīd ... ʻalá kayfīyat ikhtiṣār al-ʻadad al-marsūm bi-al-ḥaṭṭ al-jasīm, pp. [58-65]; [9] Hādhā sharḥ qaṣīdat al-Ṭughrāʾī, pp. [66-88]; [10] Abū al-Suʻūd, Mīmīyah, pp.', 'Pp. [1-24]. Bound with: [2] Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn al-Qāḍī, Iẓhār al-kunūz fī ḥall al-rumūz, pp. [24-31]; [3] ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʻAlī al-Tarīkī, Istikhrāj al-suʾāl min al-wafq al-murabbaʻ al-kāmil al-aqṭār, pp. [32-40]; [4] ʻAbd Allāh ibn Yūsuf ibn Hishām, Mūqidh al-adhhān wa-mūqiḍ al-wasnān, pp. [41-49];', 'Commentary on Rawḍat al-azhār fī ʻilm waqt al-layl wa-al-nahār, "a poem on timekeeping compiled in 794 H [i.e. 1391 or 2]" by Abū Zayd ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Abī Ghālib al-Jādarī. See David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 139.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 941', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, hand, etc. strongly suggest early 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: "a. Slip of paper: 8348; b. Slip of paper: 13713" - from handlist prepared by R. Dougherty, 1993.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 90', 'Binding: Fiberboards covered in maroon cloth with brown leather over spine and board corners (half binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns (now fully detached from boards, traces of adhesive visible) and flyleaves in shell \'marbled\' (printed pattern) wove paper in brown, red, blue and gold ; board corners and spine leather extending over boards edged in gold-stamped vegetal accents ; spine gold-stamped with decorative accents over raised bands ; edges of textblock speckled red ; spine label carries title and subject "الجزء الاول من تفسير ابي حيان وبه الثلث الاول | تفسير" ; sewn (not original) in white thread, six stations ; Western style endbands ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of cloth and leather, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 6 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), single chain lines evenly spaced roughly 28 mm. apart (vertical), three crescents watermark (see p.10, compare Heawood 863, Venice 1610), some inclusions and undissolved fibers ; heavy but crisp and well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords and sūrah headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of small red discs, hāʼs (ه), and inverted commas.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Egyptian hand in a thin line ; serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, adhering fairly closely to baseline, many closed counters, pointing in distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ, kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred.', 'Layout: Written in 33 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: Original gatherings now difficult to discern, though likely quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "كمل الثلث الاول من النهر المأخوذ من البحر ويتلوه ان شاء الله تعالي سورة يونس عليه السلام والحمد لله وحده و بالله المستعان تم"', 'Explicit: "في سوء العاقبة من الوقوع في العذاب ويحرص على هداهم ويرأف بهم ويرحمهم اللهم فصل عليه اشرف صلاة وسلم عليه ازكى سلام"', 'Incipit: "قال الشيخ الامام العلامة الحافظ سيبويه الزمان ابو حيان محمد ابن يوسف بن علي رحمه الله ورضي عنه بحمدك اللهم استفتح وبنورك استوضح من فضلك استمنح ... وبعد فان لما صنفت كتابي الكبير المسمى بالبحر المحيط في علم التفسير عجز عن قطعه لطوله السابح ... فاجريت منه نهرا تجري عيونه ... وهذا النهر مدة من بحر ليس له حرز ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the first third (through the conclusion of Sūrat al-Tawbah [9]) of Abū Ḥayyān al-Gharnāṭī's (d.1344) commentary on the Qurʼān derived from his more extensive commentary al-Baḥr al-muḥīṭ."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1005', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest early to mid 18th century (compare similar watermarks / countermarks in Velkov and Andreev, Filigranes dans les documents ottomans. I Trois croissants, p.62).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 154', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in block-printed paper (mauve / dark pink with repeating three-lobed motifs and dots in black, triangles constituting interstices between repeating circular fields in mint green) with tan leather over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in dark blue / indigo laid paper ; ill-fitting and unattached to text block, essentially recycled cover serving as wrapper ; text block once sewn in cream thread, now failed with threads remaining only inside some gatherings ; traces of endband primaries in blue and cream ; overall in somewhat poor condition with wrapper ill-fitting, abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather and paper, minor pest damage, etc. ; housed in carboard portfolio for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-32 mm. apart (horizontal), three crescents / tre lune watermark (86 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see pp.12, 30, 32, 86, etc.) and countermark "A 3" / "A Z" under trefoil (see pp.90, 93, etc.), sturdy, cream in color, well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Some keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas.', 'Script: Naskh ; compact, slightly awkward Egyptian [?] hand in a medium to bold line ; partially but irregularly seriffed with occasional tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in distinct dots though three dots represented by curved stroke looking like inverted comma, alif maqṣūrah often pointed as yāʼ ; extensively vocalized.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 17 lines per page with the three hemistichs of the takhmīs preceding each bayt of the qaṣīdah ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: V+1 (11), 4 V(51) ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; quire numbering in red ink in the form of whole words with catch title accompanied by Hindu-Arabic numberal on the recto of the opening leaf of each quire (e.g. "الثالث من الوترية ٣" ) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "اذا جئت بالمرضي من عند ربنا ..."', 'Incipit: "حرف الالف بدأت بذكر الله مدحا مقدما وأثني بحمد الله شكرا معظما واختم قولي بالصلاة وانما اصلي صلاة تملا الارض والسماء على من له اعلى العلا متبوا ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Careful though incomplete copy of the takhmīs, presumably by Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz al-Warrāq al-Lakhmī al-Qurṭubī al-Iskandarānī (d.1281) upon Muḥammad ibn Rashīd al-Wāʻiẓ al-Baghdādī al-Witrī's (d.1264) al-Qaṣāʼid al-Witrīyah or Bustān al-ʻārifīn fī maʻrifat al-dunyā wa-al-dīn, ending in Ḥarf al-fāʼ. Prose preface has been added on the verso of the added 'title page' (p.2)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 265', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.218, transcription of second volume completed 20 Ramaḍān 921 [ca. 28 October 1515]. As appears in colophon on p.601, copied by ʻAlī ibn Ismāʻīl ibn Ḥamzah in the city of "اركروقصرى" (i.e. Eğri Kasri, Gjirokastra, Gjirokastër in Albania) with transcription of fifth volume completed mid-Rajab 922 [August 1516].', 'Accompanying materials: Slip with handwritten text in script reminiscent of Greek alphabet (between pp.134-135).', 'Former shelfmark: "454 T. De M." [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis] in pencil on lower flyleaf (p.607).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather, with light brown leather over spine (rebacked) ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; board linings in pale green laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold-painted mandorla with orange recessed onlays (filled with vegetal decoration reminiscent of Déroche class. NSd 7) with gold-tooled rosette accents (pendants, etc.) and gold-tooled border ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and pink, fair condition ; overall in poor condition with entire flap lost, significant abrasion, lifting and some losses of leather, etc. ; appears to have been repaired (covers reattached) with once upper cover now lower cover ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (perhaps Arab) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines possibly grouped in threes (see p.432, 433, etc.) with 10-12 mm. between chains and 35-46 mm. between groups, thin, crisp and transluscent though sturdy, extremely well-burnished to glossy, numerous repairs (even used of marbled paper, see p.19) ; replacement leaves (pp.11-18) on European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 25 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of scrollwork / coat of arms with three bars (see p.14, 16, etc. and compare Armoiries (16) A. Indéterminées dated 1673-1717 in Velkov, Les Filigranes dans les documents Ottomans), sturdy and well-burnished ; flyleaves and leaves set between mujallads in other European laid papers, one type with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 27 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of crown-star-crescent (see p.10, 608), another crown-star-crescent (see p.606) and anchor in circle (see p.118) watermarks also appear.', 'Decoration: Keywords, headings, abbreviation symbols, etc. rubricated ; incipit and facing page surrounded by frame consisting of gold band flanked by black fillets ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas, three commas, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) ; at least two distinct Turkish / Caucasian hands ; mainly in a clear naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik), compact and serifless, quite rounded, with only slight effect of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated) and some elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing (for two and three dots) in conjoined dots, point of final nūn usually joined with bowl ; headings in a serifed script reminiscent of riqāʻ with leftward tail on free-standing alif ; opening replacement leaves (pp.11-18) in a nastaʻlīq (talik) of thinner line, quite open and elongated in the horizontal, with pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: v, II (4), V+1 (15), 3 V(45), V+1 (56), 4 V(96), V-1 (105), 6 V(165), V+1 (176), 10 V(276), 2 IV(292), II (296), iii ; chiefly quinions ; several added leaves at opening and close of codex left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: [mujallad 2] "Scribal, triangular and rectangular, in Arabic, reads: "قد تم المجلد الثاني ويتلوه المجلد الثالث كما يتلو المثاني المثالث فى يوم العشرين من شهر رمضان سنة احدى وعشرين وتسعمائة اللهم صل على سيدنا ونبينا محمد ... يا غفار يا جبار" ; [mujallad 5] "Scribal," triangular, in Arabic, reads: "ثم تم ... تم هذا المجلد الخامس من الكتاب الذي هو دستور الكتاب وليس له نظير عند العاقل البصير والعالم الخرير بمن من من ويمن بمن آمن بارسال الذي انزل عليه القرآن وتوفيق الله الذي لا يشغله شان عن شان ولا يحتاج الى الزمان والمكان ونور قلوب احبائه بنور الفرقان واسكنهم فراديس الجنان تعالى شانه اتفق الفراغ من نظم زمر لآ لى [؟] الفضل في سلك التحرير بمدينه اركرو قصرى خلد الله تعالى ملك مالكها في اليوم السبت في اواسط شهر رجب المرجب سنه اثنى وعشرين وتسعمائة على يد علي بن اسماعيل بن حمزه غفر الله لهم ولجميع المسلمين والمسلمات والمؤمنين والمؤمنات الاحياء والاموات ورحم الله لمن دعا لمصنفه ولكاتبه لصاحبه بالخير ولمن قال آمين تم تم"', 'Explicit: "توفيق در افاضت احسان كه كفيل عمر ثانيست لا يزال روزگار دولتيار مخدوم جهانيانر اگر امت باد شعر وهذا دعاء لو سكت كفيته لاني سألت الله قبل [فيك] وقد فعل والحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على رسول الله محمد وآله الطيبين"', 'Incipit: "حمد و ستايشى كه انوار اخلاصش آفاق و انفس را چون فاتحۀ صبح صادق متلالى سازد ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.11) where the entry for this work from Kashf al-ẓunūn has been transcribed.", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Vaṣṣāf's Tajziyat al-amṣār wa-tazjiyat al-aʻṣār, a history of the Īlkhāns intended as a continuation of ʻAlāʼ al-Dīn ʻAṭā Malik Juvaynī's (d.1283) Tārīkh-i Jahāngushā (Jahān-gushāy) and renowned for its form and style. Five volumes (mujallad) in one. Contents listing appears on lower flyleaf (p.608)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 234', 'Origin: As appears in colophon, executed by al-Sayyid ʻAbd Allāh, likely Seyyid Abdullah of Yedikule (d.1731), who was a favorite pupil of the celebrated calligrapher Hafız Osman Efendi (d.1698). He received his icazet in 1102 [1690 or 91] and died around 1144 [1731]. Undated but most likely executed between 1690 and 1731.', 'Former shelfmark: "109" inscribed in pencil at opening ; "542 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on hinge of lower cover.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings (doublures) in marbled paper (mainly in pink, brown, yellow, blue, and white) ; upper and lower covers carry incised and gold-painted (with red leather inlay) symmetrical scalloped panel resembling four-lobed flower or lozenge with domes emerging from the long edges, as well as tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps with gold-painted accents ; panels hinged together with dark brown leather ; in somewhat poor but fair condition with significant staining, some abrasion and lifting of leather, etc.', 'Support: Well-burnished European laid paper mounted on heavy laid paper (roughly 8 laid lines per cm.) with marbled frame (several variations in dark green, red, light blue, yellow, dark lavender, etc. ; papers of facing panels match).', 'Decoration: Written area and panels within surrounded by frame consisting of heavy and narrow gold bands outlined in black fillets ; textual dividers in the form illuminated rosettes with red and blue accents.', 'Script: Exquisite specimen of Ottoman calligraphy ; opening line of each page in fine thuluth ; five centered lines thereafter in naskh ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 6 lines per page, one large line in thuluth and five more compact lines in naskh ; written area divided to upper panel (accomodating the large line) and centered lower panel (for the shorter lines) ; opens vertically with writing parallel to spine.', "Collation: Six 'panels' (two leaves each) hinged together ; 'pagination' in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, appears toward the left of each panel apart from the last.", 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads: "كتبه العبد الفقير الى رحمة ربه القدير السيد عبد الله رضي عنه مولاه"', 'Explicit: "اللهم صل وسلم على نبي الرحمة وشفيع الامة الضعيفة محمد واله الطيبين الطاهرين اجمعين"', 'Incipit: "روي عن ابي سعيد الخدري رضي الله تعالى عنه قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم الا ان رجب شهر الله الاصم فمن صام من رجب يوما ايمانا واحتسابا استوجب رضوان الله الاكبر ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine album of calligraphy (muraqqaʻ or murakkaa) employing the text of assorted ḥadīth, executed by the renowned Ottoman calligrapher Seyyid Abdullah of Yedikule (d.1731), favorite pupil of the celebrated calligrapher Hafız Osman Efendi (d.1698).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 954', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.586, transcription completed 15 Ṣafar 1078 [ca. 6 August 1667].', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 103', 'Binding: Boards covered in textured blue cloth with blue leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "شرح انموذج اللبيب" ; resewn in white thread, eight stations ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-26 mm. apart (horizontal), crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.10, 11, 72, 73, etc.), and "AD" countermark (see p.454), medium cream in color, sturdy though fairly crisp, well-burnished to glossy ; staining.', 'Decoration: Keywords and headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas (mainly in red) ; a few marginal glosses in decorative shapes.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Egyptian hand in a medium to bold line ; mainly serifless with effect of slight inclination to the left or right (varies from one to the other), curvilinear descenders, open and closed counters, pointing in distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah usually pointed as yāʼ, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf), final nūn quite round with dot set deep in bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V (10), V+1 (21), 23 V(251), IV+2 (261), 3 V(291), II (295), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present (occasionally added in pink, see p.40, 88, etc.) ; quire numbering in the form of full words, though seemingly intentionally obscured by loss of a small portion of the upper outer corner of the opening recto of nearly every quire ; pagination in blue ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (begins with incipit page) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between pp.553-554).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "وكان الفراغ من رقم هذا الكتاب المبارك يوم السبت المبارك خامس عشر صفر الخير من شهور سنة ثمان وسبعين والف من الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلاة والسلام وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وسلم ورضي الله عن اصحاب رسول الله اجمعين امين"', 'Explicit: "فهو لم يفعل ما نهي عنه حتى يحتاج الى الاعتذار بذلك والله اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي تفضل بارسال الرسل لبيان المعاش والمعاد ... وبعد فيقول العبد الضعيف الراجي عفو الرب الرؤوف اللطيف محمد المدعو عبد الرؤوف ابن المناوي الحدادي ... اني شرحت فيما مضى كتاب انوذج اللبيب في خصائص الحبيب للحافظ الكبير الامام الشهير الجلال السيوطي ... شرحا اقتصرت فيه على حل الفاظه وايراد الدليل ... فاطلع عليه بعض من غلب عليه داء الحسد وحب التغليط واللدد وقال ان الشرح المذكور لم يكشف النقاب عن اسرار الكتاب ... فلما بلغني ما ذكره هذا الحاسد المتحامل والغبي الجاهل بادرت للشروع في هذا الشرح على عجل ... وهو في الحقيقة كالشرح للاول ... وسميته توضيح فتح الرؤوف المجيب بشرح انموذج اللبيب ..."', "Title from 'title page' inscription on p.1 and opening matter on p.3.", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of ʻAbd al-Raʼūf Ibn al-Munāwī's (d.1621) revision of his commentary Fatḥ al-Raʼūf al-mujīb on Unmūdhaj al-labīb fī khaṣāʼiṣ al-ḥabīb (also known as al-Khaṣāʼṣ al-ṣughrá), al-Suyūṭī's (d.1505) abridgment of his own Kifāyat al-labīb fī khaṣāʼiṣ al-ḥabīb (known as al-Khaṣāʼiṣ al-kubrá) on the virtues and distinctive attributes of the Prophet."])

en: (count: ['On pp. [1] and [13], illuminated ʻunwāns; text rubricated and enclosed in gold borders; gold dots separate phrase endings; chapter headings decorated with foliate patterns in gold; marginal commentary in hand of copyist; table of contents unfinished.', 'yawm al-sabt al-rābiʻ wa-al-ʻishrīn min al-Muḥarram al-ḥarām min sanat sitt ʻasharah wa-miʾatayn wa-alf [i.e. 6 June 1801] ... wa-qad kāna al-badʻ wa-al-khatm fī mawḍiʻ huwa bi-marʾá wa-masmaʻ min al-Qusṭantīnīyah ... fī qaryah ʻalá sāḥil al-khalīj yuqāl la-hā Çaklījaç[?] min nawāḥī Ūskūdār.....', 'Dates of beginning and end of composition and provenance in colophon: qad waqaʻa al-ibtidāʾ fī hādhihi al-ḥawāshī ... fī yawm al-ithnayn al-ḥādī wa-al-ʻishrīn min shahr Shawwāl al-mukarram min sanat arbaʻ ʻasharah wa-miʾatayn wa-alf [i.e. 23 March 1800] ... wa-kāna itmām al-jild al-awwal minhu fī ākhir bāb al-ḥukm fī al-asārá ... fī yawm al-ithnayn ghurrat Jumādá al-ākhirah min sanat khamas ʻasharah wa-miʾatayn wa-alf [i.e. 20 September 1800] ... wa-ḥaṣal al-khitām ... fī', 'Commentary by the author on the commentary of Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad al-Sarakhsī (11th cent.) on al-Siyar al-kabīr, a work on Islamic international law by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥasan al-Shaybānī (ca. 750-804 or 5). Dedicated to Sultan Selim III (1761-1808) and several other important personages of his court.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 219', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.168, Kitāb yashtamilu ʻalá al-Abuqṭī wa-ṭuruqih copied by Dāwūd ibn Buqṭur with transcription finished 13 Amshīr 1387 lil-Shuhadāʼ al-Abrār (Era of Martyrs or Era of Diocletian) [February 1671]. A note beside the colophon describes the manuscript exemplar from which this copy was made. As appears on p.185, transcription of Kitāb mubārak yashtamilu ʻalá maʻrifat ṭāliʻ al-sanah al-shamsīyah...etc. completed 2 Ṣafar 1082 [June 1671].', 'Accompanying materials: Papyrus fragements in folded sheet of bond paper just inside front cover.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red cloth with red leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western binding ; flyleaves and pastedowns in European wove paper ; sewn originally in four stations (threads gone), now resown in white thread, ten stations ; overall in fair condition with some staining, abrasion, lifting of spine leather, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 18 mm. apart (vertical), and crown-star-crescent watermark ; sturdy and well-burnished ; binion of ruled wove paper added at both the front and back of the codex.', 'Decoration: Section headings, keywords, abbreviation symbols, and numerals rubricated ; occasional textual dividers in the form of four v-signs forming a cross, three inverted commas, hāʼ surrounded by four dots or four inverted commas, etc. in red and black ; written area of incipit page surrounded by red rule-border ; numerous tables and diagrams (see p.52, p.54, p.121, etc.).', 'Script: Naskh ; mainly in a large, clear Egyptian hand ; virtually serifless, though right-sloping head-serifs appear on occasional lām and free standing alif ; mainly curvilinear descenders ; open and closed counters ; elongation of horizontal strokes with occasional sweeping tails ; yāʼ of fī mainly mardūdah ; pointing in distinct dots ; sīn marked with ʻalāmat al-ihmāl in the form of a stroke looking like an inverted caret ; section headings in a bold, seriffed naskh ; final work and excerpts in different hands.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 19 lines per page ; mainly single column but text of the urjūzah divided to two columns ; numerous tables ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling-board clearly evident).', 'Collation: i, 2 II (8), VI (20), VI+1 (33), VI (45), VIII (61), III+1 (68), III (74), V (84), III (90), I+1 (93), III (99), II (103), i ; quiring very difficult to discern ; binion of ruled wove paper added at both the opening and the close of the codex ; several leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Graeco-Coptic numerals, accompanied by foliation in purple ink with corresponding Hindu-Arabic numerals ; foliation in pencil, Hindu-Arabic numerals, in the centr of the upper margin of the recto of each leaf ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes added leaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "تم كتاب الاقبطي بمعونة الرب جل اسمه على يد اضعف خلق الله داوود بن بقطر بالاسم قسيس [؟] بالقاهرة المحروسة في ثالث عشر من شهر امشير سنة الف وثلاثمائة وسبعة وثمانين للشهداء الابرار يرحمنا الرب بصلواتهم امين في الايام الابوية السيدية البطريوكية المرقصية انبا متاووس الرب يديم ايامه في هدؤ وسلام امين ..."', 'Title from opening on p.10.', 'Ms. codex.', '8. p.198-p.206 : [blank].', '7. p.186-p.197 : [assorted excerpts].', '6. p.169-185 : Kitāb mubārak yashtamilu ʻalá maʻrifat ṭāliʻ al-sanah al-shamsīyah wa-ikhrāj al-ṭāliʻ fī ayy burj min al-ithná ʻashar burj al-musammá bi-al-Shiʻrah al-Yamānīyah wa-asmāʼ al-ithná ʻashar burj wa-al-saʻd minhum wa-al-naḥs.', '5. p.17-p.168 : Mukhtaṣar Ḥisāb al-Abuqṭīyāt / al-Asʻad Ibn al-ʻAssāl.', '4. p.10-p.16 : Urjūzah fī maʻrifat al-Abuqṭī wa-ḥisāb al-ṣawm al-muqaddas wa-al-Fiṣḥ wa-al-aʻyād wa-ghayr dhālik / al-Asʻad Ibn al-ʻAssāl.', '3. p.10-p.168 : Kitāb yashtamilu ʻalá al-Abuqṭī / al-Asʻad Ibn al-ʻAssāl.', '2. p.9 : [excerpt of a horoscope?].', '1. p.1-p.8 : [blank].', 'Clear copy of a work by al-Asʻad Abū al-Faraj Hibat Allāh Ibn al-ʻAssāl addressing the Coptic calendar, dates of holidays and fasts and their calculation, as well as the calendars and holidays of the Jews and Muslims. Opens with an Urjūzah fī maʻrifat al-Abuqṭī wa-ḥisāb al-ṣawm al-muqaddas wa-al-Fiṣḥ wa-al-aʻyād wa-ghayr dhālik (pp.10-16) and continues with a Mukhtaṣar Ḥisāb al-Abuqṭīyāt (pp.17-168). Followed by a work on the signs of the zodiac (abrāj) and their interpretation for fortune or misfortune.'])

en: (count: ['Origin: Colophon gives date for the completion of this manuscript as Monday in the middle ten days of the month of Muḥarram, 1122 / March 1720.', 'Binding: Simple leather bound codex with medallion-shaped tooled designs on upper and lower covers as well as envelope flap, which have eroded.', 'Decoration: Double red line borders text.', 'Script: Text written in black naskh script with rubrications. Initial two folios lack borders and are written in a different hand. These seem to have been pasted in after the book was bound.', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'The Story of Yūsuf (Joseph) in 27 majālis (sessions), composed of verses from the Qurʼān, ḥadīths, moral reflections, and edifying anecdotes, in both verse and prose.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 15', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests 18th century. Colophon on fol.156a-156b (p.309-310) indicates text was copied in the city of Tūqāt (Tokat) in the Khātūnīyah madrasah.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 154. Zubdat al-kuran."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in orange brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in laid paper (under leather turn-ins) ; upper and lower cover carry simple design of incised fillets marking a border, cornerpieces and centerline ; sewn in rose colored thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in green and cream ; in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting and shrinkage of leather, moisture damage, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper in perhaps a few different types ; main type is smooth, well-burnished and fairly crisp with a yellowish tint, roughly 10-12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines evenly spaced 26 mm. apart (vertical) ; watermarks include grapes, names (difficult to make out) and crown ; latter type is slightly thicker and whiter in color with laid lines spaced roughly 13 per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines spaced 25 mm. apart (vertical) ; main watermark appears to be a type of scrollwork with three hats ; staining, ink smudges (occasionally obscuring text see fol.130b/p.260), and hole burned in fol.128b (p.256).', "Decoration: Crude 'headpiece' on fol.1b (p.2) consisting of semi-circular outlines in red with vertical stalks in black and title in red ; red rule-border surroundes the written area ; text rubricated with headings, keywords, sigla and other abbreviations, overlining, etc. in red.", 'Script: Naskh ; bold Turkish hand, written in a thick, heavy line ; virtually serifless ; mainly closed counters ; pointing in two dots appears as a line or inverted caret ; slight effect of tilt to the left ; alif lām of definite article occasionally assimilated ; compact, adhereing to baseline though occasionally letters in final words of a line are superscript.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 15 V (150), IV (158), i ; chiefly quinions ; fol.23a (p.45) left blank, but with what appears to be no text missing ; final two folios unruled, carry related extratextual material in same hand as main text ; catchwords present (last word of final line repeated on the recto of the following leaf) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between pp.221-223 and includes final flyleaf).', 'Colophon: "Scribal" [?], triangular, reads: " قد وقع الفراغ من تسويد هذه [كذا] الكتاب [؟] المتين يتأبدوا هب القوى والنعم المسنين بديع الشكل عديم المثال كثير النفع قليل المقال في مدينة توقات بمدرسة خاتونية صانها الله عن المصائب الدينية والدنيوية ويسر الختم تمت الكتاب"', 'Explicit: "ولو وقف عليه الهمزة [؟] كان الوقف على هزوا في البقرة لا تبديل لكلمات الله انه السميع العليم ... وبجاه من احببته وبعثته"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعلنا من القارئين الذين هم قرؤا القرآن بصحيح الروايات ... اما بعد فيقول الفقير الى رحمة الله الغني حامد ابن الحاج عبد الفتاح البالوى لما قرأت القرآن العظيم من اوله الى اخره ختمة كاملة بالقراآت المتواترة للائمة العشرة ..."', "Title from 'headpiece' on fol.1b (p.2).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the work on the ten readings of the Qurʼan as collected by the author from various sources.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 997', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Accompanying materials: Slip at close with inscription "علم اليقين ملا محسن العوالم" likely to note how the spine should be stamped (paginted pp.225-226).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 146', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "علم اليقين ملا محسن العوالم | J.H.D." ; sewn in white thread over two recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion and slight spine slant.', 'Support: Sturdy machine wove paper.', 'Decoration: Text almost entirely executed in a pinkish-red ink (only pp.143-149 in a brownish-black ink).', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 17 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, III (6), I (8), IV (16), 2 I(20), IV+I (30), 5 IV(70), VI (82), 3 IV(106), III (112), i ; chiefly quaternions ; pages between sections (mainly corresponding to gatherings though with a few constituting multiple gatherings) left blank with some carrying section titles in pencil (see pp.33, 41, 181, 213) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert).', 'Explicit: "والاسمى حقيقا والنية بينها كالنية بين المطر والثلج"', 'Incipit: "شرف العلم بشرف موضوعه فأشرف العلوم علم التوحيد لكون موضوعه ذات الله سبحانه وصفاته وبعبارة اخرى ووجه اعلى هو الموجود بما هو موجود ..."', "Title from inscription on opening 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of selections from ʻIlm al-yaqīn, the work on mystical philosophy by Muḥsin-i Fayz̤-i Kāshānī (d.1679) known as Mullā Muḥsin, a student of Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī (d.1641).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 943', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; each work copied separately ; paper, hand, etc. would suggest late 17th or early 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 92', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (salmon, pink, orange, blue) with light brown leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; boardlinings in pink-tinted laid paper ; serving more as a wrapper for the unsewn leaves (only a few bifolia still intact) ; overall in poor condition with much abrasion, staining, moisture damage, losses of leather and paper, foreedge flap detaching, opening leaves detached and split, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of two types ; opening type with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22-23 mm. apart (horizontal), three crescents watermark (parallel to chain lines, see pp.4, 8-9) and "PR" countermark, creamy, sturdy, burnished to glossy ; second work on a different type (trimmed to a different size) with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27-28 mm. apart (horizontal), three crescents watermark (perpendicular to chains, 84 mm. long, see pp.50,55) and "Vd" countermark (see p.53).', 'Decoration: Keywords, assages of text being commented upon, occasional vocalization, and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; two main hands ; opening work in a clear Egyptian hand in a medium line, partially but irregularly seriffed with small right-sloping head-serifs on occasional lām, etc., effect of tilt to the left, open and closed counters, pointing mainly in distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ, kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred ; second work in a clear Egyptian or Syrian hand in a thin line, partially but irregularly seriffed with dramatic inclination to the right, slight effect of words descending to baseline, marked elongation of vertical strokes, curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, freely ligatured.', 'Layout: Written in 11 and 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: VI-1 (9), V (19), I (21), V-1 (30) ; catchwords present ; final quire trimmed to a different size ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: [Sharḥ al-Risālah al-Samarqandīyah] "Scribal," triangular, reads "تم الشرح المبارك بحمد الله وعونه وحسن توفيقه على يد افقر العباد واحوجهم الى ربه العلي الفقير علي الواحي المالكي غفر الله له وللمسلمين تم"', 'Explicit: [Sharḥ al-Risālah al-Samarqandīyah] "في مقام شدة الاهتمام بالايضاح والحمد لله على تمام الاصباح بعد الظلام المحوج الى المصباح ونرجو الانتظام به في سلك دعاء الطلبة في الصباح والروح والله اعلم" ; [Nubdhah fī al-alghāz] "قلب اسمه ظهر وفي معاقيه [؟] اتسهر وهذا اخر الكلام"', 'Incipit: [Sharḥ al-Risālah al-Samarqandīyah] "يقول العبد المفتقر الى الطاف ربه الخفية عصام الدين بن محمد ... ان احسن ما تزاد به النعم الوفية وتدفع به البلية في البكرة والعشية الحمد لله الواهب العطية اي كل عطية والعطية المعهودة التي نزلت فيها السورة ..." ; [Nubdhah fī al-alghāz] "الحمد لله وكفى وسلام على عباده الذين اصطفى وبعد فهذه بعض الغاز تشرح الخاطر ويقطع بها الطريق المسافر فاقول ومن الله القبول وعليه التكلان وبه المستعان ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. composite codex.', '5. p.60 : [excerpts of other riddles (alghāz) in verse].', '4. p.59 : [mainly blank].', '3. p.43-p.58 : Hādhihi Nubdhah fī al-alghāz / ʻAbd Allāh Abū al-Mawāhib al-Ṣiddīqī Sibṭ al-Ḥasan.', '2. p.42 : [blank].', '1. p.1-p.41 : Kitāb ʻIṣām al-Dīn Sharḥ al-Risālah al-Samarqandīyah / ‘Isām al-Dīn Ibrāhīm ibn Muḥammad ibn ʻArab Shāh al-Isfarāyīnī.', 'Fine copy of the commentary by ‘Isām al-Dīn Ibrāhīm ibn Muḥammad ibn ʻArab Shāh al-Isfarā’inī (al-Isfarāyinī) (d.1537) upon al-Risālah al-Samarqandīyah, a work on metaphor (istiʻārah) by Abū al-Qāsim ibn Abī Bakr al- Samarqandī (ca. 1483), followed by a a brief selection of alghāz (riddles) in verse by ʻAbd Allāh Abū al-Mawāhib al-Ṣiddīqī al-Bakrī Sibṭ al-Ḥasan (fl. 1643).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 563', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. suggests 16th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and fore edge flap label "IL 257" (likely supplied by Yahuda see acquisitions slip).', "Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in light brown leather ; hinges in yellow, gold-flecked paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition, similar to Déroche OSd 4) and pendants, along with tooled border (now largely covered by repairs) ; sewn in lavender thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in lime green and lavender, fairly good condition ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards (especially in upper cover, revealing use of manuscript 'waste' in pasteboards), upper cover detaching at spine, etc. ; repairs in various leathers ; housed in box for protection.", 'Support: European laid paper ; mainly with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 29 mm. apart (horizontal), and anchor in circle watermark (two line, star above, see p.114, 120, etc.), medium cream in color, sturdy and well-burnished to glossy ; toward close, another type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 32-34 mm. apart (horizontal), and tower or column with cross above (reminiscent of a chess piece) watermark (see p.334, 343, etc.).', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Turkish hand, initially (through about p.19) fairly large and freely ligatured ; elsewhere more compact, partially seriffed with dramatic left-sloping head-serif mainly on lām of definite article, effect of tilt to the left, slight effect of words descending to baseline, curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots, point of final nūn set deep in bowl ; opening replacement leaf in still another hand.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV-2+2 (8), 5 IV(48), III (54), 15 IV(174), I+1 (177), i ; chiefly quaternions ; opening leaf replaced ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between pp.323-324).', 'Explicit: "فذحبوه فيما ميتة هي لاقل تحري واكل في الاختيار تمت بحمد الله وحسن توفيقه والحمد لله رب العالمين آمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله باسط الارض ورافع السماء وباعث الرسل والانبياء ... وبعد فاني لما رأيت علم الفقه اعظم العلوم واحوجها في كيفية سلوك المنهج القويم والصراط المستقيم اردت ان اجمع فيه مختصرا في المذاهب الاربعة ... وسميته عيون المذاهب الكاملي ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.3) and opening matter on p.5.", 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of the treatise on the four orthodox schools of law by Qiwām al-Dīn (Qawām al-Dīn) Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad al-Khujandī al-Sanjārī al-Kākī (d.1348 or 9). Attributed on tail edge inscription and 'title page' (p.3) to Jalāl al-Dīn al-Khabbāzī, apparently the author of a commentary on this work (see GAL, S II 268, cmt. a)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1010', 'Origin: As appears in inscription (colophon) on opening leaf, transcription completed 1236 [1820 or 21].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Photocopy of a letter, from C. A. Storey at the India Office, Whitehall, London, to Mr. Turner, 4 January 1927: "The title of the Persian book which you left with me some time ago is Guldastah (i.e. The Nosegay) and the author Ray Govinda Rama Rao. It was completed at Masulipatan in the year 1236 of the Muhamadan era (=1820-1 A.D.). As you will see from the slips which I have inserted at a number of points, the contents are miscellaneous, but the greater part of the book consists of extremely brief historical summaries relating mainly to Southern India. The pictures of course have little artistic value and the work itself is unimportant. Such things have no fixed market value, and it is always difficult to estimate what they will fetch, but I do not think it would be possible to sell this manuscript for more than £1 (one pound) and it might even be difficult to find any one who would give so much. "I must apologize for keeping the manuscript so long. "Yours sincerely "C.A. Storey" -- b. Photocopy of a letter, from "Ernest [Turner?]" at the India Office to "Alice," 5-1-27: "I have at last got the promised report on your Persian book and send it herewith. It is evidently not a treasure, but the Map of the World near the beginning is rather fascinating, as it seems to omit Europe Asia Africa America and most other places." -- c. Slip of paper stamped "Rare Book Room/Stephen Spaulding Memorial" and inscribed in pencil: SS-4077/Edwards cat 784:198/£5" -- d. Two cards with writing of Emilie Savage-Smith [?]: "Personal family tree/Moghul (NW India/illus. fine late 18th c./go thru & remove paper slips w/ ID" and "SS Isl. Ms. shelved on VB,1" -- e. Slip of paper: "Counted for 1968/69 Annual Report"; in hand of Jamison: "Letter from C. A. Storey laid in."', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 159', 'Binding: Boards covered in shell marbled paper (in brown, blue, yellow, and red) with brown leather over spine and board corners (half binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted laid paper ; sewn in cream thread over three tapes / cords (flexible sewing) ; overall in quite poor condition with cover fully detached at spine with losses of leather and lining (adhesive exposed), sewing almost entirely failed, abrasion, red rot, staining, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart (vertical) and watermarks of "S & C WISE 1818" (fol.1, etc.) and heart divided quarterly with initials "E V I C" and "1818" below (see fol.3, etc. and compare Heawood no.3466, in sample dated 1823), thin and sturdy, dark cream in color ; two leaves on a non-European (likely Indian) laid paper.', 'Decoration: Some keywords and headings rubricated, many others overlined in red ; written area throughout surrounded by red or black double rule-border ; illustrated with several diagrams (namely one full-page color representation of the source of growth and spiritual attributes and of a wheel in orange and red, along with four full-page architectural layouts / plans and one half-page world map in black and white) and portraits of various rulers or legends (two full-page and roughly 21 half to three-quarter page paintings, varying in size, most heavily employing pastel colors such as lavender, pink, pale yellow, mint green, red, dark orange, etc.) ; some paintings cut from other pages and pasted on to the present leaves.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq with elements of shikastah ; fine Indian hand, varying in size ; serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in distinct or conjoined dots, sweeping descenders (final yāʼ often uncurved, final nūn often reversed or recurved).', 'Layout: Roughly 17-33 lines per page on the diagonal, much variation depending on whether an illustration is present ; every other page left blank (i.e. only the recto of each leaf has been employed except for two cases where an illustration / portrait has been supplied on the verso, see fols.8-9).', 'Collation: Likely originally quinions, most bifolia now split and sewing failing ; foliation in faint brown ink (reversed, i.e. proceeds as though the codex were read left to right).', 'Colophon: "مراد حق ما بود آنچه گفتم ز هجرت ده صد دو سی و شش بود سنه ١٢٣۶ تحریر تمام شد [؟] مدینه مچهلی پتن"', 'Title from inscription on opening leaf.', 'Ms. codex.', '"Inserted paper slips describe contents specifically: [1] \'A note on the Copernican theory that the Earth & the other planets revolve round the Sun.\' [2] \'A list of the Muhammadan rulers of northern India.\' Accompanying illustration shows Indian ruler with an English king or governor. [3] \'A sketch of the history of the Marhatta kingdom to the time of Baji Rao.\' [4] \'Plan of a fort (apparently at Daulatabad).\' [5] \'Portrait of Sultan Abu \'l-Hasan Shah, the last king of Golconda, who died A.D. 1700.\' [6] \'Statement concerning the revenues of the Subahs of the Deccan.\' [7] \'Plan of Hyderabad.\' [8] \'Account of Asaf-Jah.\' [9] \'Map of the World.\' [10] \'Geographical notes on Europe.\' [11] \'Notes on England.\' [12] \'On the Pope and his relations with England.\' [13] \'A summary of English history (little more than a list of kings) to the time of Richard I\'" - from handlist prepared by R. Dougherty, 1993.', 'Elegant copy of a collection of historical miscellanies, mainly pertaining to southern India, composed by Ray Govinda Rama Rao (see inscription on opening leaf).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 308', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.249, copied by Muḥammad Amīn al-Ḥusaynī al-Tirmidhī (al-Tirmiẕī) [?] ( محمد امين الحسينى الترمذى ). Date of transcription not specified but decoration, hand, paper etc. suggest 16th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with verses (paginated pp.55-56) -- b. Slip with short note (paginated pp.75-76) -- c. Slip with calculations and date of 1219 [1804 or 5] (paginated pp.121-122).', 'Former shelfmark: "113 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in deep red leather ; Type II binding (with flap), possibly two piece binding ; board linings in light pink-tinted paper ; upper and lower covers carry gold-tooled border and rosette corner accents ; sewn in dark pink / red thread, two stations, failing with many gatherings loose ; worked chevron endbands in dark pink and yellow, fair condition with some damage ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather to spine, upper cover detaching at spine, envelope flap detaching at fore edge flap, etc. ; pieced repairs in dark red-brown leather at board corners, spine, joints, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with roughly 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical, quite diffuse) and no chain lines visible, cloudy formation, dark cream in color, quite sturdy and well-burnished ; staining and tidelines.', 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of large rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche and pendants surrounded by swirling arabesque with floral motifs (in gold, white, pink, yellow, orange, and red on a lapis lazuli ground) with accent and cornerpieces in gold, black and red and border in turquoise, surmounted by a scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) filled with same swirling arabesque design on fields of lapis lazuli and gold, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas and gold discs ; central written area surrounded by frame consisting of heavy gold band defined by black fillets, margins and divisions within written area also outlined in gold rules ; central (and in some places marginal) written area gold-flecked.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant hand ; serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, mainly closed counters, pointing in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, with up to 32 lines on the diagonal in the margin ; frame-ruled ; written area occasionally divided to two columns to set off verses.', 'Collation: ii, 15 IV(120), I (122) ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present for marginal text (mainly Būstān) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," in Arabic, reads "كتبه الفقير الحقير محمد امين الحسينى الترمدى [الترمذي ؟] غفر ذنوبه و ستر عيوبه"', 'Explicit: "و الحمد لله وحده در خاتم كتاب كلستان و الله المستعان بتوفيق بارى تعالى درين جمله چنانكه عادت مولفانست ز شعر متقدمان بطريق استعارت تلفيقى نرفت ... واطلب لنفسك من خير تريد به من بعد ذلك غفرانا لصاحبه حكايت آورده اند كه حاتم اصم از شاكردان و ميردان شيخ بود ... چون تصانيف و رسايل نظم شيخ سعدى مشهور و معروف است شروع در ذكران نكرديم والسلام"', 'Incipit: [Gulistān] "منت خدایرا عز و جل که طاعتش موجب قربتست..." ; [Būstān] "بنام خداوند جان آفرین حکیم سخن در زبان آفرین خداوند بخشنده ی دستگیر کریم خطا بخش پوزش پذیر عزیزی که هر کز درش سر بتافت ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Gulistān, celebrated collection of moralizing anecdotes in rhymed prose interspersed with verse (maqāmah form), composed in 1258 by the renowned Persian poet and prose writer, Saʻdī (d.1292). Accompanied by the text of his Būstān in the margins and followed by further ḥikāyat, Risālah-ʼyi dah qāʻidah of Sayyid ʻAlī Hamadānī (d.1385) and a manqabat for Shaykh Saʻdī (see pp.228-249).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 243', 'Origin: As appears in signature on each panel, executed by Eğrikapılı Mehmet Râsim Efendi known as İmamzade (d.1756), who acquired his icazet in 1705.', 'Former shelfmark: "545 T. D. M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on upper board lining ; "39" in pencil on recto of opening panel.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings (doublures) and reverse of opening and closing panels in fine marbled paper (ebru in blue, red, pink, green, etc.) ; upper and lower covers carry gold-tooled borders ; panels edged and hinged together with red brown leather ; overall in fairly good condition ; repairs to spine and hinges in Japanese paper.', 'Support: Written area on well-burnished paper, pieced, set into an elaborate frame in several different laid papers (yellow-tinted, mint-tinted, pink-tinted, orange-tinted, and untinted, all gold-flecked and with colors of facing panels matching) and mounted.', 'Decoration: Illuminated rectangular pieces filled with vegetal decoration in shades of gold, pink, orange, etc. flank lower central written area on each panel ; written area and divisions within surrounded by frames of gold defined by bands of turquoise and white as well as black fillets ; illuminated floral accents in shades of pink, light green, red, gold, etc. set off text and frames.', 'Script: Exquisite specimen of Ottoman calligraphy ; opening large line of each panel in thuluth (sülüs), following lines naskh (nesih).', 'Layout: Written in roughly nine lines per page, a large line with eight following lines on the diagonal.', "Collation: Six 'panels' (mounted leaves) edged and hinged together with brown leather ; opens vertically.", 'Colophon: Each panel signed "حرره الفقير محمد راسم," "حرره الفقير محمد راسم المعروف بامام," etc.', 'Explicit: "وفوقه عرش الرحمن ومنه تفجر انهار الجنة"', 'Incipit: ""بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم ان المرأة تقبل في صورة شيطان قال النبي صلوات الله عليه وسلامه ان المسلم اذا انفق على اهله نفقة وهو يحتسبها كانت له صدقة ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Exquisite album of calligraphy (muraqqaʻ or murakkaa) comprising kıt'alar employing ḥadīth of the Prophet executed by the celebrated Ottoman calligrapher Eğrikapılı Mehmet Râsim Efendi (d.1756), renowned student of Seyyid Abdullah of Yedikule (d.1731)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 306', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.276, copied by ʻAbd al-Laṭīf ibn Shaykh Darvīsh Muḥammad al-Shirvānī, al-shahīr bi-Aflāṭūn, (Abdüllatif b. Derviş Mehmet eş-Şirvânî) with transcription completed in 971 [1563 or 4].', 'Former shelfmark: "344" inscribed in pencil on recto of opening leaf (p.1) ; "344 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of opening leaf (p.2).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in brown leather ; upper and lower covers carry tooled and gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche OAi 8), pendants and cornerpieces, along with tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps and fillets in gold ; upper and lower doublures carry diamond-shaped central ornament of gold-tooled interlace and border in gold fillets ; sewn in dull yellow, dark blue and dull pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in dull yellow and pink, damaged somewhat ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, staining, delamination of boards at corners, lifting of leather, envelope flap fully detached, etc. ; minor pieced repairs in dark brown leather ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of perhap a few types ; opening type with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-28 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of anchor in circle (see p.8-9, 22, etc.) ; another type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27-32 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of crossbow in circle (p.262, 268, etc.) alternating with crossed arrows (see p.258, 272, etc.) ; all quite sturdy, dull cream in color, and well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.4 consisting of large (rising out of the well of turquoise and gold into which it is set and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue), scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) with a central cartouche (carrying the title "كتاب كلستان" in white on a black ground with red floral accents) surrounded by swirling floral vegetal motifs in gold, red, yellow, white, pink, and turquoise on fields of gold and lapis lazuli ; keywords and some vocalization rubricated, others chrysographed or in blue ink ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of gold band defined by black and blue fillets ; tailpiece consisting of floral accents in red and black ink flanking close (p.276).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant hand ; serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, mainly closed counters, pointing in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled ; written area occasionally divided to two columns to set off verses.', 'Collation: 17 IV(136), I (138), i ; almost exclusively quaternions ; p.38 left partially blank, perhaps for illustration never realized ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," in Arabic, reads "كتبه العبد المذنب عبد اللطيف المذنب بن شيخ درويش محمد الشروانى الشهير بافلاطون غفر الله لهما في سنه ٩٧١ م"', 'Explicit: "در خاتمۀ کتاب گلستان تمام شد کتاب گلستان و الله الملک المستعان و بتوفیق باری عز اسمه درین جمله چنانکه عادت مؤلفان است از شعر متقدمان بطریق استعارت تلفیقی نرفت ... و اطلب لنفسک من خیر ترید به من بعد ذلک غفرانا لکاتبه"', 'Incipit: "منت خدایرا عز و جل که طاعتش موجب قربتست ..."', 'Title from headpiece at opening on p.4 and close on p.275.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Gulistān, celebrated collection of moralizing anecdotes in rhymed prose interspersed with verse (maqāmah form), composed in 1258 by the renowned Persian poet and prose writer, Saʻdī (d.1292).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 304', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; decoration, paper, etc. may suggest 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "315 T. D. M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf (p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards (quite heavy) covered in quite dark red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; possibly two-piece binding ; doublures in light brown leather ; upper and lower covers carry large block-stamped (two impressions with join visible) and gold-painted recessed rectangular panel filled with symmetrical vegetal composition with floral motifs, surrounded by gold-tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps defined by gold fillets ; upper and lower doublures carry stamped, gold-painted (over red leather recessed onlays), central medallion built up of a repeated dome-shaped stamp (two impressions, forming a lozenge shape, also repeated on interior of envelope flap) with interior floral motif and gold-tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps defined by gold fillets ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn mainly in dark pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in dark brown and cream ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; repairs to board edges, spine (rebacked), and fore edge flap in quite dark brown leather ; opening gathering has been resewn in blue thread through spine leather (visible on spine).', 'Support: non-European laid paper of perhaps two types ; one type with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, indistinct), cloudy formation, medium cream in color, well-burnished, quite sturdy ; another type with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), beige in color, transluscent, sturdy, and from p.65 alternating with pink or blue tinted leaves ; some repairs and staining ; flyleaves in European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (vertical), and watermarks of lion in shield and eagle with wings spread.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.6 consisting of rectangular panel with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral motifs in red-orange, blue, lavender, and gold on fields of blue and gold, surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) filled with swirling floral vegetal composition in gold, white, blue, lavender, red-orange, and pink with black outlining on a gold and blue ground, all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and set into a well / border of red and gold with white accents ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of gold band outlined by black fillets ; keywords chrysographed ; textual dividers in the form of gold discs.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; fine Ottoman hand in a medium line ; serifless with characteristic elongation of horizontal strokes, effect of words descending to baseline, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 11 V(110), I+1 (113), ii ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (includes flyleaves).', 'Explicit: "خاتمه تمام شد كتاب كلستان و الله المستعان بتوفيق بارى عز اسمه درين جمله چنانكه رسم مؤلفانست از شعر متقدمان بطريق استعارت تلفيقى برفت ... واطلب لنفسك من خير تريد به من بعد ذلك غفرانا لصاحبه"', 'Incipit: "منت خدای را عز و جل که طاعتش موجب قربتست ..."', 'Title from close on p.229.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Gulistān, celebrated collection of moralizing anecdotes in rhymed prose interspersed with verse (maqāmah form), composed in 1258 by the renowned Persian poet and prose writer, Saʻdī (d.1292).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 310', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; decoration, etc. would suggest mid to late 19th century. Apparently executed by the same craftsmen who produced Isl. Ms. 298.', 'Former shelfmark: "203 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on upper pastedown.', 'Binding: Thin boards (semi-limp) covered in dark green to black leather ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in light blue-green wove paper ; spine gold-stamped with title and double bands (at head, tail and above and below title) ; sewn in white thread over three recessed cords, also stab sewn, tightly bound ; Western style endbands ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion, excess adhesive and some breakage at gutters, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 11-12 laid lines per cm. (vertical or horizontal, quite distinct, fairly straight) and chain lines only rarely visible, quite dense and sturdy though transluscent, highly sized and burnished, gray in tone ; some staining, minor pest damage, etc.', 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminate headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral vegetal motifs in gold, green, lavender, red and white on grounds of dark blue, surmounted by large piece evoking dome composed of swirling arabesques and floral motifs in shades of gold, orange, lavender, blue, green and white on a gold ground, all set in a well of dark blue (with white dots), bright spring green, orange and gold bands ; gold cloud-bands and finely executed illuminated marginal decoration (with floral motifs and saz leaves in gold, lavender and blue) complete the double-page illumination (pp.2-3) ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of heavy gold band with outermost blue rule ; margin defined by narrow gold band ; keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of four dots in red.', 'Script: Shikastah-nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand in a thin line ; compact and freely ligatured with effect of words descending to baseline, pointing (somewhat casual) in distinct dots, elongation of horizontal strokes and sweeping descenders (many reversed or recurved).', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV (8), II (12), IV (20), III (26), 3 IV (50), IV + 1 (59), i ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "الحمد لله وصلی الله علی محمد واله تم الکتاب بعون الملک الوهاب در روزشنبه شهر جمادی الاولی [؟] صانها الله عن الحدثان تحریر شد در دار الخلافه طهران یا ناظر فیه اسئل بالله مرحمة علی المصنف واستغفر لصاحبه واطلب لنفسک من خیر تید بها من بعد ذلک غفرانا لکاتبه ..."', 'Explicit: "تمام شد کتاب گلستان جناب شیخ سعدی شیرازی رحمة الله بتوفیق حضرت باری عز اسمه هو المستعان وعلیه التکلان بدانکه در این کتاب چنانکه رسم مؤلفانست و داب مصنفانست از اشعار متقدمان بطریق استعاره تلفیقی نرفت ... بر رسولان بلاغ باشد و بس"', 'Incipit: "منت خدایرا عز و جل که طاعتش موجب قربتست ..."', 'Title from closing matter on p.117.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Gulistān, celebrated collection of moralizing anecdotes in rhymed prose interspersed with verse (maqāmah form), composed in 1258 by the renowned Persian poet and prose writer, Saʻdī (d.1292). Contributions to the cataloguing from Elizabeth Kunze.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 311', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper would suggest late 18th or 19th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "364 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather now with tan leather over spine and edges/turn-ins (leather faced and edged framed binding formed by turned-out doublures) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in red-brown leather ; upper and lower covers carry stamped (with now green onlays) scalloped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition) and pendants, as well as a tooled border framing central area and over edging ; sewn in light red thread, six stations incorporating primaries ; worked chevron endbands in light red and spring green, fair condition ; overall in fairly good condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, etc. though ill-fitting (too tall, etc.).', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly distinct and straight) and no chain lines visible, quite crisp, thin and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished, off-white to gray in color.', 'Decoration: Written area surrounded by frame consisting of red, turquoise, and gold bands with outermost blue rule, columns within and outer margin defined by narrow gold bands outlined by black fillets ; section headings rubricated.', 'Script: Shikastah (shikastah-nastaʻlīq / شكسته نستعليق ) ; elegant hand ; freely ligatured, with effect of words descending to baseline, elongated ’horizontal’ strokes, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page, with written area mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 6 IV(48), I (50) ; quaternions followed by a single bifolium ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "بنام خویش کردم ختم پایان الهی عاقبت محمود گردان پند ... به کس مپسند آنچت نیست درخور مسلمانی همین است ای برادر م م م م م م م م م م م م م"', 'Incipit: "بنام آنكه جان را فكرت آموخت چراغ دل بنور حكمت افروخت ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the Gulshān-i Rāz, the well-known Ṣūfī mas̲navī of Maḥmūd ibn ʻAbd al-Karīm ibn Yaḥyā al-Shabistarī (d. ca. 1320).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 410', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.397, transcription completed 4 Ramaḍān 892 [ca. 24 August 1487].', 'Former shelfmark: "493 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on interior of upper cover.', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in marbled paper (mainly in blue and pink) with dark red leather over spine and edges / turn-ins (marbled paper faced and leather edged framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted paper ; sewn in slate blue thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in slate blue and cream, only headband remains (and in fair condition) ; overall in somewhat poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of paper and leather, upper cover and spine material (including spine lining) detaching, etc. ; repair to spine / upper joint in red textile.', 'Support: European laid paper of two types ; main type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 32-35 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of scales / balances in circle (round scale) with star on pole above (see p.88, 108, 186, 310, etc. and compare Piccard no.117251 Udine 1479), quite sturdy and well-burnished ; at opening of codex, another type with about 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 37 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of banner / flag / standard with cross on pole (see p.12, 28-29, 42, 48-49, 54, etc. and compare Briquet no. 5989 Palermo 1477 and Piccard nos. 122974 / 122975 Ulm 1478 - 1480).', "Decoration: Keywords and headings rubricated ; written area (and columns within) surrounded by red rule-border ; simple 'tailpiece' in red consisting of floral motifs based on intersecting arcs within a circle flanks colophon.", 'Script: Naskh with some elements of nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant hand ; serifless with only slight effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, contrast in thickness of horizontal and vertical strokes, pointing (two and three dots) mainly in strokes rather than distinct dots, curvilinear descenders, some elongation of horizontal strokes ; extensively vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page with written area mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V-1 (9), 7 V(79), IV (87), 3 V(117), V-2 (125), 7 V(195), 4 (199) ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "تمت بعون الله و حسن التوفيق تحريرا فى الرابع رمضان المبارك سنه اثنى وتسعين وثمانمائة"', 'Explicit: "اولا عرش افسرى كرسى سريرى جهان چاكر جهابان دستكيرى"', 'Incipit: "بحمد الواحد الاحد القديم وبسم الله ذى المين العظيم ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine early copy of Şeyhî's celebrated Turkish version of the Persian allegorical romance, Khusraw va Shīrīn."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 858', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest mid 19th century. Ownership statement on front flyleaf (p.3) provides rough terminus ante quem of 1875.', 'Accompanying materials: Slip with notes in hand of Eleazar Birnbaum, "Author ? | Title: [KITĀB-i LUGHAT] Title on fore-edge | In Persian. | A brief dictionary Persian-Persian from rāʼ it is very sketchy | At the end part of a Persian technical treatise on prosody. (incomplete) | No date, possibly 17th cent ? | Ownership note on fly leaf 1292 A.H. (1875 A.D.) | E Birnbaum June 1964" (paginated pp.1-2).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. ms. temp. no. 7', 'Binding: Covers in black leather with orange-brown interior (limp binding without boards) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; once stab sewn in heavy white cord ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and purple, fair condition and detaching from text block with spine lining (through which they are sewn) ; overall in fair condition with cover fully detached, some abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types (mainly machine laid) ; opening type (also appearing later in the volume) with a crosshatch of "laid lines," chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of "JP" in medallion with bird on ball above (see p.11, 18, 19, 102, 104, 109, etc.) ; next type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-28 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of "ALMASSO" (see p.28, 30, 31, etc.) and scrollwork with bird above tower and "POLLERA" below (see p.24, 26, 36, etc.) ; next type with crosshatch of "laid lines," chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (horizontal) and watermarks of "ALMASSO" and scrollwork with bird above tower and "GIOR MAGNANI" below (see p.40, 42, 43, 45, 52, 54, 58, 59 63, etc. and compare Heawood 3748) ; next type with crosshatch of "laid lines," chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (horizontal) and watermarks of stag leaping above pond (stag springing or salient, or even courant, p.122, 123, etc.) and "BAGLIETTO" (see p.120 125, etc.) as well as countermark "DB" in cursive initials (p.122, etc.) ; still another type with crosshatch of "laid lines," chain lines spaced 25-28 mm. apart (horizontal) and watermark of "Florino GPP" below flower ; well-burnished ; staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; clear, spacious hand in a medium line ; serifless with effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, mainly closed counters, freely ligatured.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 15 lines per page.', 'Collation: II (4), IV-2 (10), IV-1 (17), III+1 (24), 8 IV(88), II (92), 5 IV(132), III-1 (137) ; almost exclusively quaternions with added binion at opening ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert).', 'Incipit: "باب الالف مع الالف افدستا بفتح [همزه] و دال مهمله و سکون فا و سین مهمله حمد خدای عز و جل و ستایش شگفت و نیکو چه اینکلمه مرکبست از اخذ [افد] که بمعنی شگفت است ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from edge title.', 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.267-p.276 : [Risālah-i ʻarūz̤-i Fārsī]', '3. p.11-p.266 : [Kitāb-i lughāt].', '2. p.10 : [blank].', '1. p.4-p.9 : [assorted poetic excerpts].', 'Careful copy of an excerpt from a Persian-Persian dictionary from Bāb al-alif through Bāb al-nūn, followed by an excerpt from a work on Persian prosody and preceded by assorted poetic excerpts.'])

en: (count: ['Origin: As appears in colophon at close on p.344, copied by ʻĀrif Jadval-kash [?] ( كاتب العبد عارف جدول کش ) with date of transcription unspecified ; perhaps late 15th or 16th century.', 'Binding: Leather bound codex with intricate tooling on upper and lower covers as well as envelope flap; some floral and designs around borders; central medalion features a male and female gazelle. Doublures contain leather filigree with remnants of green and gold paint.', 'Decoration: Opening page is ornamented with gold and blue paint; following pages bordered with gold and blue paint; chapter titles written in blue and red ink.', 'Script: Text written in nastaʻlīq.', 'Title from illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Masnavī (long poem in rhymed couplets) completed in 1177; narrates the allegorical tale of a mystical journey of thirty birds. Narrative frame of this mystical journey is broken into numerous anecdotes which the various birds recount along the way.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 312', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.59, copied by Jamāl Shāh Maḥmūd with transcription completed Ṣafar 984 [May 1576].', 'Former shelfmark: "462 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on interior of upper cover.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in light brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap, but not flush with text block) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted wove paper ; upper and lower covers carry tooled border (blind rules) ; sewn in dark purple thread, two stations ; overall in fair condition with some staining and minor abrasion.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly distinct) and any chain lines not clearly visible, transluscent, sturdy, quite well-burnished, dark cream in color ; flyleaves in wove paper (indistinct embossed mark in front flyleaf).', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of large rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying the title ( "كتاب قران سعدين" ) and swirling vegetal design in white with floral motifs in pink, yellow, and red, flanked by floral vegetal design in gold on fields of blue, entire piece surrounded by bands of red, gold and blue and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of a narrow gold band defined by black fillets and red and blue rules, narrow gold bands separate the four columns within as well ; headings and keywords rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page with written area divided into four columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, III (6), V (16), II (20), i ; ternion, quinion and binion ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, in Arabic, reads "تمت الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب بتاريخ شهر صفر سنه ۹۸۴ كاتبه جمال شاه محمود م م م"', 'Explicit: "بر در شه خدمت من و السلام"', 'Incipit: "حمد گویم که توفیق خداوند حنان ... نام این نسخۀ و الاست قران سعدین ... حمد خداوند سرایم نخست تا شود این نامه بنامش درست ..."', 'Title from illuminated headpiece at opening (p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the mas̲navī on the meeting of Sulṭān Muʻizz al-Dīn Kayqubād and his father Nāṣir al-Dīn Bughrā Khān by Amīr Khusraw Dihlavī (d.1325).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 832', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest mid-19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with notes between pp.118-119 -- b. Small slip with calculations between pp.166-167 -- c. Slip with lines (geomantic figures) and values between pp.176-177.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in orange paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in cream thread, two stations, many threads broken ; worked endbands in yellow and cream, virtually gone, only trace of headband remains ; overall in poor condition with much abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of spine leather, fully detached at spine, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; one type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of elaborate scrollwork (see p.8, 9, etc.) ; another type with laid lines in a mesh or crosshatch pattern, chain lines spaced 25-26 mm. apart (horizontal) and watermark of "LAVARENNA" (see p.52, 63, 104) ; another type with laid lines in a mesh or crosshatch pattern, chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal) and watermarks of scrollwork with balance / scales (see p.230, etc.) and "CARLO GIUSTI" (see p.233, etc.) ; all medium to dark cream, fairly sturdy, and well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords, headings and symbols rubricated ; numerous tables and diagrams in black and red (including figure on p.108).', 'Script: Shikastah (shikastah-nastaʻlīq / شكسته نستعليق ) ; elegant hand ; partially but irregularly seriffed with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, elongated horizontal strokes, pointing inconsistent though typically in distinct dots ; Arabic text (excerpts and text of figures, etc.) in a fine Persianate naskh.', 'Layout: Written in 16 and 17 lines per page (as well 32 additional lines on the diagonal in the margins of the final section) ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 14 IV(112), IV+1 (121) ; exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf).', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على على خير خلقه محمد وآله اجمعين اما بعد منضور اين رساله اين بود كه پوشیده ..."', 'Title from rubricated heading at opening on p.4.', 'Ms. codex.', '5. p.177-p.242 : [treatise on the same topic opening with "Faṣl dar bayān-i taskīnāt-i ashkāl-i raml..."].', '4. p.161-p.176 : [divination tables].', '3. p.154-p.160 : [blank].', '2. p.55-p.153 : Hāẕā Kitāb-i Raml-i Dāniyāl-i payghambar.', '1. p.4-p.55 : Kitāb-i Raml-i Dāniyāl al-nabī.', 'Elegant copy of collection of treatises on geomancy (ʻilm al-raml or khaṭṭ bi-raml) with numerous diagrams.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 315', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; on the whole, perhaps later 18th or even early 19th century with carpet pages possibly 17th (opening double-page) and later 18th century (second double-page).', 'Former shelfmark: "191 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" and "257" in pencil, "6" in ink, all on recto of opening leaf.', 'Binding: Heavy pasteboards covered in painted lacquerwork, spine in black leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in fine painted lacquerwork featuring tall narcissus-like plant with leaves in shades of green and flowers and buds in yellow with pink accents at the head of a central stalk, accompanied by other flowers in blue, white and shades of pink, all on a red ground with border in black with gold accents (composition of upper doublure mirrors that of lower doublure) ; upper and lower covers bear paintings evoking traditional bookcover design with scalloped mandorla, pendants, cornerpieces and elaborate borders all filled with swirling vegetal design with floral motifs in shades of gold, red, pink, blue, yellow, and white on grounds of green, yellow, black and red ; now sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and white, some damage to headband ; overall in poor condition with significant losses of lacquer, pigment and board sustained by upper and lower covers, crazing and cracking in doublures, some delamination of boards, etc.', 'Support: Written area possibly in non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper and mounted in leaves of non-European (5-6 laid lines per cm., horizontal, curved, no chains visible, quite sturdy and well-burnished) and occasionally European laid paper (10 laid lines per cm., vertical, chain lines spaced 30-32 mm. apart, horizontal, scrollwork watermarks) ; margins mainly surface-dyed pink or yellow ; some breakthrough at frames ; thin, orange surface-dyed slips protect illumination at later section opening and tailpiece.', 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminated carpet pages (anepigraphic frontispieces) at opening ; initial double-page illumination with each page consisting of central ornament in the form of an eight-pointed star, pendants and cornerpieces filled with arabesques and floral accents in gold, turquoise, red, blue, etc. on grounds of blue (lapis), black and gold set in a field of gold floral vegetal motifs, likely taken from another manuscript and mounted here ; next double-page illumination with each page carrying central eight-pointed star with pendants filled with small floral motifs in pink, yellow, blue, white, etc. on a gold ground set in a narrow central panel defined by elaborate borders and filled with rich floral vegetal decoration (with sāz leaves, large floral motifs, etc.) in gold with red, blue and yellow accents, also likely taken from a different manuscript ; double-page illumination at opening carries text in 13 lines per page set off by gold cloud-bands (written area set into page) surrounded by a border richly decorated with small floral motifs in shades of pink, yellow, blue, orange, etc. on a field of blue defined by bands of yellow, blue and gold interlace with outermost vertical stalks (tīgh) in gold and blue ; written area elsewhere throughout surrounded by heavy band of blue with gold vegetal design and outermost bands of red, gold and blue, divisions within defined by gold bands and vegetal designs, additional bands define outer margin ; simple illuminated headpieces (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) in the form of small rectangular pieces with empty gold cartouches appear at section openings ; text throughout set off by gold cloud-bands.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; exquisite hand in a medium line ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 29 lines per page, with written area divided to three columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 4 (4), 8 II(36), II+1 (41) ; almost exclusively binions ; catchwords present in lower left corner of written area ;', 'Explicit: "تیغ زبان بیش نشاید کشید سخن کن چوبمقطع رسید تمت كتاب روضه الانوار افضل المتكلمين كمال الملة والدين خواجو كرمانى نور الله قبره بعون الله تعالى وفضله وجوده"', 'Incipit: "زینت الروضة في الاول بسم آله الصمد المفضل"', 'Title from close.', 'Ms. composite codex.', "Splendid copy of the Ṣūfistic poem in 20 maqālahs and 2,224 bayts composed by Kamāl al-Dīn Abū al-ʻAṭāʼ Maḥmūd ibn ʻAlī Khvājū-yi Kirmānī (d.1352) for Shams al-Dīn Maḥmūd ibn Ṣāʼin, vizier of the Injūʼid ruler Abū Isḥāq Injū (r.1341-53). Fourth part of Khvājū's Khamsah, modeled on the Khamsah of Niẓāmī."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 240', 'Origin: As appears at close, executed by Mustafa el-Haşimî known as Kadızade in 1195 [1780 or 1].', 'Former shelfmark: "550 T. D. M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" in pencil on upper board lining ; "107" in pencil on recto of opening panel.', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in gold-flecked, pale yellow paper and framed in tan leather (covering board edges / turn-ins and likely spine at one time) now with dark purple leather (and Japanese paper repair) over spine (leather edged framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; opens vertically ; board linings in magenta paper ; gold rule-borders on leather edging ; overall in fairly good condition ; repairs in Japanese paper ; occasional repair to hinges in same dark purple leather.', 'Support: Written area on well-burnished laid paper, pieced, set into an elaborate frame in several different laid papers (pale peach-tinted, pink-tinted, light blue-tinted, orange-tinted, etc. with colors of facing panels matching) and mounted.', 'Decoration: Written area (and divisions within) surrounded by gold frame set off by black and white fillets ; written area set into a frame of tinted paper (colors of facing panels match).', 'Script: Fine specimen of Ottoman calligraphy ; in thuluth (sülüs) and naskh (nesih).', 'Layout: Written in four lines per page ; two large lines thuluth and two smaller centered lines in naskh, constituting two distinct streams of text', "Collation: Eleven 'panels' hinged together with tan leather.", 'Colophon: "مشقه اضعف العباد السيد مصطفى الهاشمى المعروف بقاضى زاده سنه ١١٩٥ه"', 'Explicit: "وتبارك اسمك وتعالى جدك وجد ثناؤك ولا اله غيرك"', 'Incipit: "رب يسر ولا تعسر رب تمم بالخير ا ب ت ج ح د ز ذ ر س ش ص ط ع و ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine album of calligraphy (muraqqaʻ / murakkaa) in this case a meșk murakkaa or album of meșkler (exercises) employing first (in seventeen kıt'alar) the principal alphabetic exercises (müfredat) and closing with three kıt'alar of mürekkebat exercises employing the alpha-numeric system (abjad / abced hesabı) and a prayer."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 413', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, hand, decoration, etc. would suggest 17th or 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "124 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf and recto of back flyleaf ; "263" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.1) ; "٢٩١" on label affixed to lower cover.', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in dark brown leather with brown leather over board edges and spine (likely repair) ; Type III binding (without flap), likely two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in dark red-violet surface-dyed wove paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped lozenge-shaped central ornament (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition, similar to Déroche class. NSd 5) with tooled and gold-painted accents and rule-border ; sewn in red-violet thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and red-violet, good condition ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, significant negative draw in upper cover, etc. ; ill-fitting text block.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, quite indistinct) and no chain lines visible, cloudy formation, inclusions visible, thin and transluscent though sturdy, light burnished, beige in color ; some breakthrough at frames ; added leaves in European paper (trace of raisin watermark, see p.154, 156, etc.).', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) appears at opening on p.2, consisting of rectangular piece surmounted by semi-circular piece or dome with crudely drawn floral vegetal motifs in shades of pink, blue, red, white on a gold ground, surmounted by crude vertical stalks (tīgh) in red and blue ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by gold frame defined by black fillets (also defines divisions within) with outermost red and blue rules, elsewhere only gold frame appears ; section headings rubricated ; several somewhat crude illustrations appear toward the end of the text (see pp.50, 54, 55, 81, 83, 88, 96, 115, 122), all half or not quite full-page miniatures.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, well-formed Turkish hand in a medium line ; partially but irregularly seriffed with occasional head-serifs on free-standing alif, lām, etc., effect of tilt to the left, closed and open counters, curvilinear descenders, pointing in conjoined dots or strokes, occasionally vocalized.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 15 lines per page with written area divided to two columns ; final poem in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, I (2), IV (10), 2 V(30), IV+1 (39), V (49), 3 IV(73), IV-6+6 (81), i ; mainly quaternions and quinions ; several blank leaves at opening and close of codex ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "عين عفوكله اول بزه ناظر سوزمز بودر اول وآخر تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب تم تم تم"', 'Incipit: "سطر بسم الله اى اولو الالباب اولدى متفاح باب قفل كتاب ..."', 'Title from rubricated heading in opening matter on p.30.', 'Ms. codex.', '2. p.140-p.146 : Bahr-i tavil.', '1. p.2-p.139 : Kitab-i Şah u geda / Yahyâ Bey.', 'Careful copy of Şah u geda or "The King and the beggar," most popular of the five mesnevis of the Hamse of Dukâginzâde (Dukakinzade) Yahyâ Bey Taşlıcalı (d.1578), an important 16th century Ottoman poet of Albanian origin. Illustrated with nine miniatures. Followed by an additional poem.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 280', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.1236, copied by ʻAbd al-Qādir Sāvajī al-Qazvīnī with transcription completed 7 Jumādá II in an unspecified year. F. Abdullaeva, Oleg Akimushkin, and Philippa Vaughan refer the manuscript\'s production to the latter 16th or early 17th century. "As for the place of origin, the scribe was evidently of Iranian background and training, even if living in India, while the paintings are clearly to be distinguished as Indian. It seems that the calligrapher and painter (there were at least two of them) did not work in the same period" - from description of F. Abdullaeva.', 'Former shelfmark: "153 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost), likely two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in dark blue textured, coated paper (embossed with scrolling vegetal design) ; upper and lower covers carry stamped (orange-red recessed onlays) and gold-painted central lozenge (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OSd), pendants and cornerpieces with gold-painted accents and borders with outermost guilloché roll ; edges of text block gold-painted with floral designs ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and red ; overall in fair condition with loss of flap and minor abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, staining, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian) laid paper with roughly 9 laid lines per cm. (both horizontal and vertical orientation found in different leaves), somewhat indistinct, some curving, no regular chain lines plainly visible, medium cream in color, thin and crisp though sturdy, lightly burnished ; minor breakthrough at frames in a few leaves.', 'Decoration: "The manuscript has three ʻunwāns (double page illumination at the beginning of the most important chapters) and one sarlawḥ (initial illumination in the beginning of the book), and 14 miniatures in local Indian style. The text is therefore not very heavily illustrated, an average of one picture every 40 folios or so, though the distribution of paintings is rather irregular, the gaps ranging from 6 folios to 135, and as is common, with no illustrations in the \'historical\' section of the poem, after the establishment of the Sāsānian dynasty under Ardashīr. Ten of the 14 paintings illustrate episodes occurring in the lifetime of the main hero, Rustam, and include several of the most frequently illustrated scences" - from description of F. Abdullaeva (see p.30 in "An unknown Shāhnāma from Ann Arbor") ; as reported by F. Abdullaeva, Philippa Vaughan proposes for the paintings the "sub-Imperial" Mughal style of the first quarter of the 17th century with influence of the palette of the Kashmīrī school, particularly the use of bright pink, orange and light green in combination ; headings rubricated ; written area and devisions within outlined by a gold frame defined by black fillets.', 'Script: Nastʻalīq ; compact, elegant Persianate hand in a medium line ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in distinct dots.', 'Layout: "Organized in 4 columns with 25 lines on each page" - from description of F. Abdullaeva.', 'Collation: ii, IV+1 (9), 6 V(69), III (75), V+1 (86), 4 V(126), II (130), 2 V(150), IV (158), 3 V(188), V-1 (197), 6 V(257), V-1 (266), 2 V(286), V-1 (295), 4 V(335), III+3 (344), 6 V(404), II (408), 3 V(438), V-1 (447), 7 V(517), IV (525), 9 V(615), I (617), ii ; chiefly quinions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of middle of the quire marks in the form of oblique strokes in black ink, upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf, lower-outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present (though occasionally lost to trimming) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "تمت تمام شد کتاب شاه نامه بتاریخ هفتم ماه جماد الآخر کاتبه فقیر الحقیر عبد القادر ساوجی القزوینی سنة تحریر یافت [؟]"', 'Explicit: "هر آنکس که دارد هش و رای [و] دین پس از مرگ بر من کند به آفرین"', 'Incipit: "بنام خدواند جان و خرد کزین برتر اندیشه می نگذرد [بر گذرد]..."', 'Title from colophon on p.1236.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Splendid copy of the renowned epic by Firdawsī (d.1020), illustrated with 14 miniatures. Detailed description of the manuscript and miniatures by Firuza I. Abdullaeva ("An unknown Shāhnāma from Ann Arbor," published in Manuscripta Orientalia, vol.11, no.1, March 2005, pp.28-60).'])

en: (count: ['Origin: As appears in colophon on p.126, transcription completed 17 Shaʻbān 975 [ca. 16 February 1568]. Authorial colophon preceding scribal colophon (also on p.126) indicates that composition was completed in Ramaḍān (و اتمام انتظام اين نسخه در ماه تسبيح وشهر تراويح منتظم در سلك شهور سنه سته وثمانين وثمان مايه لا زال مباركا على فيه اتفاق افتاد) 886 [1481].', 'Accompanying materials: Scrap with line in pencil "ديوان شاه نقشبندى قدس سره" (paginated pp.32A-32B).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in marbled paper (mainly in pale orange and dark blue) ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold-painted mandorla (filled with assymetrical vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OAi2 1) and pendants as well as gold-painted accents, tooled rosettes and tooled borders (single rule and series of s-shaped stamps) ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pale green and brown, fair condition with some damage ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, losses at board corners, etc. ; repairs (rehinged) in pink paper.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, curved and somewhat indistinct) and no chain lines clearly visible, well-burnished, dark cream in color ; staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.4 consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche (overlaid with delicate black vegetal designs) carrying title in white riqāʻ "کتاب تحفة الاحرار" set off by similar pendants and accent pieces in black and red on a lapis lazuli ground all covered with swirling vegetal designs in gold with red, yellow, and white floral accents, surrounded by a heavy band of gold interlace defined by red and white (with black crosses) and surmounted by a heavy band of black with further swirling vegetal designs, itself surmounted by a framed triangular piece or hasp in gold and lapis lazuli with similar swirling vegetal designs, all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in lapis lazuli ; headings and keywords rubricated ; written area surrounded by frame of gold with turquoise and blue rules.', 'Script: Text written in black nastaʻlīq script (contribution by D. Mancini-Lander).', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 7 IV(56), IV-1 (63) ; exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, mainly in Arabic, reads: "والحمد لله الكريم الجواد والصلوة على محمد وآله خير العباد وسلم تسليما كثيرا كثيرا فى تاريخ ١٧ شعبان المعظم سنه ٩٧٥ تم تم تم تم تم تم"', 'Explicit: "مهر نه خاتمۀ این خطاب شد رقم خاتم تم الکتاب "', 'Incipit: "حامدا لمن جعل جنان کل عارف مخزن اسرار كماله ولسان کل واضح مطلع انوار جماله ..."', 'Title from illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening.', 'Ms. codex.', "Tuhfat al-Aḥrār, composed in 886/1481, is the third of seven masnavīs (long poem in rhymed couplets) that make up Jāmī's Haft Awrang (Seven Thrones). This work is a didactic poem, presenting ethical and moral advice in twenty discourses, each accompanied by illustrative anecdotes. The final discourse offers counsel to the poet's own son (contribution by D. Mancini-Lander)."])

en: (count: ['Illuminated ʻunwān on pp. [1-2]; chapter headings illuminated in gold and colored inks; gold dots mark verse endings; text enclosed in borders of gold and black; illuminated foliate roundels in margins mark tenths (ʻushr), thirtieths (juzʼ), sixtieths (ḥizb) of text, and prostrations (sajdah); edges gilt.', "Date and copyist's name in colophon: sawwadahu aḍʻaf al-ʻibād wa-aḥqaruhum Muṣṭafá ibn ʻAbd Allāh al-mushtahir bi-Ḥātimī al-mansūb li-marḥūm wa-maghfūr Ṣadrī Aʻẓam Naṣūḥ Pāshā ... wa-waqaʻa al-farāgh min taḥrīr hādhihi al-muṣḥaf al-karīm fī sanat ithnayn wa-thalāthīn wa-alf fī shahr Jumādhī al-ākhir [i.e. April 1623].", 'Pp. [722-32]: prayers in Arabic and instructions in Turkish for the reading of the Qurʼān.'])

en: (count: ['Illuminated ʻunwān on pp. [1-2]; chapter headings illuminated in blue and gold; gold dots mark verse endings; text enclosed in gold and black bordres; tenths (ʻushr), thirtieths (juzʾ), and sixtieths (ḥizb) of text, and prostrations (sajdah), indicated in margins in gold ink; edges patterned in green and gold gilt; binding stamped in gold.', "Date, copyist's name, and provenance in colophon: katabahu Ḥafiẓ Muḥammad ibn Qāsim al-mushtahir bi-al-Imām ... wa-waqaʻa al-farāgh min al-khidmah bi-tanmīqihi ... fī Dār al-Fatḥ Qusṭanṭīnīyah ... fī shahr Rabīʻ al-awwal min sanat sabaʻ wa-thalāthīn wa-alf min al-hijrah al-nabawīyah [i.e. November-December 1627]....", 'The Koranic text, followed by a prayer.'])

en: (count: ['Illuminated ʻunwān on pp. [1-2]; chapter headings in gold rectangles; verse endings marked by gold dots; text enclosed within foliate borders, mainly in gold; thirtieths (juzʾ), quarters (rubʻ), thirds (thulth) and halves (nuṣf) of text indicated in margins by gold foliate roundels; gold lines separate lines of text.', 'Date of 17th cent. from cataloging of William Hoyt Worrell, 1925.'])

en: (count: ['Illuminated ʻunwān on pp. [1-2]; chapter headings in gold; gold and polychrome roundels mark end of each verse; 30 subsections indicated in margins in gold script; text enclosed in borders of red, blue, black, and gold; edges gilded in pattern of green and gold gilt.', 'al-shaykh nādahu fī baladat Brūsā....', 'Date suggested by researcher, 14 May 1980: "Dated as late 16th or 17th century. Colophon evidently copied verbatim from earlier copy: date, place, scribe, everything. By: Muhammad Isa Waley, Dept. of Oriental Manuscripts and Printed Books, British Library." Date of original copy, copyist\'s name, and provenance in colophon: qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min taḥrīr hādhā al-kalām al-qadīr fī yawm al-thulāthā min shuhūr sanat ithnay wa-ʻishrūn wa-sabaʻmiʾah [i.e. 1322 or 3] ... ʻan yad Muṣṭafá Dahdah'])

en: (count: ['Text and sūra title rubricated; gold roundels at end of each verse; pages bordered in red, black, and gold; pp. 5-8 illuminated in colors with gold; roundels in margins indicate divisions of text into 30 equal sections.', 'ḥayātī wa-baʻd wafātī fī yad awlādī al-dhukūr wa-baʻd al-inqirāḍ fī yad aqrabāʼī min al-dhukūr....', "Date, copyist's name, name of source of copy, and conditions of inheritance of this item in colophon (beg. p. 612): ḥarrarahu ... al-sayyid Muḥammad Amīn al-Ṣafwatī ibn Aḥmad bi-ḥāfiẓ al-Qurʼān Nān Zādah ... qad waqaʻa al-farāgh fī al-yawm al-ʻasharah min Jumāzī al-ākhir li-sanat thalāth wa-sabʻīn wa-miʼatayn wa-alf [i.e. 5 February 1857] ... qad waqaftu hādhā al-muṣḥaf al-sharīf ibtighāʼan li-mirḍāt Allāh taʻālá bi-sharṭ an yūjad wa-yuḥfaẓ fī yadī mā dumtu fī"])

en: (count: ["Illumination on pp. [1-2]; chapter headings illuminated; gold dots and foliate flourishes mark verse and chapter endings; text enclosed in wide gold borders; illuminated marginal rosettes mark division of text into thirtieths (juzʼ) and sixtieths (ḥizb); gilder's name at bottom of p. [522]: dhahhabahu Bahāʼ al-Dīn bin Tawfīq; edges gilded with foliate patterns; green leather endpages painted with gold and silver sunburst designs; binding gold-stamped and painted in silver and gold foliate designs.", "Date and copyist's name on p. [518] at opening of closing invocation: qad tasharrafa bi-kitābat hādhihi al-muṣḥaf al-sharīf ... Kathīr al-Masāwī al-Būrdūrī Nūrī Ḥāfiẓ ʻUthmān al-mushtahar bi-Qāyish Zādah ... li-sanat khams wa-thalāthamiʼah wa-alf."])

en: (count: ['blue paper endpapers; red leather binding and slipcase stamped and painted in gold and silver.', 'Illumination on pp. [1-2]; chapter headings and colophons illuminated; verse endings marked with illuminated rosettes, each different; text enclosed in gold borders; illuminated rosettes in margins mark end of each juzʼ (1/30th); marginal indications in red for sixtieths (ḥizb or niṣf juzʼ) and 120ths (niṣf ḥizb) of text; rubricated marginal commentaries in hand of Muḥammad Khalūṣī; tables and closing discourse are rubricated and enclosed in golded borders; vol. edges gilded and painted; gilded', '[i.e. 1895 or 6]; name of copyist of terminal discourse in colophon on p. [545]: sawwadahu Muḥammad Khalūṣī min tilmīdh al-maʻrūf bi-al-ḥājj Muḥammad Shawqī ... fī Muḥarram sanat 1310 [i.e. July-August 1892].', "Date of copying and copyist's name in colophon on p. [502]: sawwdahu kathīr al-musāwī ... Būrdūrī al-faqīr al-ḥaqīr Nūrī ʻUthmān al-mushtahar al-ḥāfiẓ al-Qurʼān bi-Qāyish Zādah rāqiman ʻalá mā wāfaqa muṣḥaf al-sharīf ithnā wa-miʼah ... qad waqaʻa al-farāgh fī awākhir shahr Dhī al-Ḥijjah li-sanat tisʻa wa-thalāthamiʼah wa-alf [i.e. July 1892]; date of gilding and gilder's name at bottom of colophon: dhahhabahu al-ḥājj Aḥmad min tilmīdh al-ḥājj Ḥasan[?] sanat 1313", 'marginal notes/ examined by M. Zacharia 8/24/89."', '"With marginal notes, excerpted from many sources, on textual variants, division of the text into verses, liturgical pronunciation etc.; a closing prayer [pp. 503-505]; tables showing the relationship of the Ten Readers (ḳurrāʼ), the Twenty Reciters (ruwāt), [and the Eighty Brotherhoods (ṭuruq), pp. [506-508], an explanatory discourse by the writer of the marginal notes [pp. 509-545]. Cataloging by William Hoyt Worrell, 1925. Researcher\'s note: "Calligraphic masterpiece/unique gilding/interesting'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 237', "Origin: As appears in colophon, executed by İbrahim Rodosi ; date of transcription not specified, though calligrapher's activity (acquiring his icazet shortly after the death of his first teacher İsmail Zühdî in 1731) suggests mid to late 18th century.", 'Former shelfmark: "559 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on interior of upper cover ; "116" inscriped in pencil at opening.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather with spine in a lighter red-brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in pink-tinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped and gold-painted scalloped mandorla filled with symmetrical vegetal composition (compare binding ornament on cover of Isl. Ms. 230), as well as tooled border consisting of guilloché roll flanked by gold fillets ; panels hinged together with red-brown leather ; overall in fair condition with some staining, abrasion, lifting of leather, spine split near head, etc.', 'Support: Well-burnished laid paper (in some cases surface-dyed pink) pieced, set into frame consisting of other surface-dyed and gold-flecked papers in combinations of orange and green, blue and pink, orange and magenta, yellow and green, green and magenta, lavender and orange, etc. (papers of facing pages match) set off by gold bands and white fillets.', 'Decoration: Decorative illuminated pieces consisting mainly of scalloped semi-circular pieces (domes) overlaid with swirling vegetal pattern in gold, red, pink, white, blue, etc. flank the compact central lines ; other illuminated flanking pieces of different vegetal composition appear on some panels ; written area surrounded by frame in bands of gold varying thickness ; textual divders in the form of illuminated rosettes with accents in pink, white, blue, etc.', 'Script: Fine specimen of Ottoman calligraphy ; two large lines of each page in thuluth ; two central lines of each page in naskh ; fully vocalized ; each continues a distinct stream of text though both open in alphabetic exercises.', 'Layout: Written in four lines per page, two large lines in thuluth (sülüs) and two more compact lines in naskh (nesih) ; written area divided into upper and lower panels accommodating the large lines and a central panel divided to accomodate the two more compact lines.', "Collation: Ten 'panels' (mounted leaves) edged in and hinged together with red-brown leather ; opens vertically.", 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads: "مشقه اضعف الكتاب ابراهيم الردوسي"', 'Explicit: [in thuluth / sülüs] "سبحانك اللهم وبحمدك وتبارك اسمك وتعالى جدك وجل ثناؤك ولا اله غيرك" ; [in naskh / nesih] "فان امارتي بالسوء ما اتعظت من جهلها بنذير الشيب"', 'Incipit: "رب يسر ولا تعسر رب تمم بالخير"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine album of calligraphy (muraqqaʻ / murakkaa) executed by the Ottoman calligrapher İbrahim Rodosi (d.1787). Comprises a meșk murakkaa or album of meșkler (exercises) in two scripts (thuluth / sülüs and naskh / nesih) employing the principal alphabetic exercises (müfredat), composed word exercises (mürekkebat) with the alpha-numeric system (abjad / abced hesabı), invocations, and a portion of the text of al-Buṣīrī's Qaṣīdat al-Burdah."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 324', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, etc. may suggest early 16th century (binding much later).', 'Former shelfmark: "130" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf and on \'title page\' (p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather ; Type II binding (with flap), two-piece binding, overlapping flanges visible at spine ; pastedowns and flyleaves in marbled paper (mainly in yellow, blue, lavender, orange, etc.) on European laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry central rectangular panel defined by gold fillets with tooled rosette accents and guilloché roll border (flanked by gold fillets) in gold ; sewn in dark pink thread, four stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, fairly good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion, staining, lifting of spine leather, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (vertical, curved and somewhat indistinct) and no chain lines plainly visible, dark cream in color, sturdy and quite well-burnished ; some breakthrough at frames (a few repaired).', 'Decoration: Exquisite double-page illumination at opening on fol.1b-2a consists of large rectangular panels each divided to central rectangular panel carrying opening text set off by cloud-bands (in gold with floral accents) and upper and lower rectangular panels with gold cartouches carrying the title and author ("قصايد و غزليات افصح فضلا و افضل فصحى جامع فنون كلامي مولانا عبد الرحمن جامى") in white flanked by pendants and surrounded by elegant swirling arabesque with floral accents in gold, red, black, light blue, lavender, yellow, etc. on fields of gold and lapis lazuli evoking book cover design, entire rectangular panel surrounded by elaborate scalloped border (marginal decoration) evoking a series of scalloped domes and rosettes accented with perpendicular stalks [tīgh] at the spandrels and apices of the scallops and filled with continuation of the vegetal and chī cloud design on fields of gold and lapis lazuli ; further elegant illuminated headpieces at the openings of the قصايد (fol.70b) and غزليات (fol.73b) ; written area throughout gold-flecked and surrounded by frame consisting of a series of red, turquoise, gold, \'white\' (blind outline in black fillets), and blue fillets ; keywords and headings in white ; bands of interlace or floral vegetal decoration on a filed of gold accent the written area of many pages.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; compact, elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 14 lines per page, often divided to two columns ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, IV-1 (7), 2 IV(23), III (29), 34 IV(301), III (307), 8 IV(371), IV+1 (380), i ; Chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present (occasionally lacking) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "چه خوش باشد که در کاشانه غم دو همدم درد دل گویند با هم"', 'Incipit: "بسم الله الرحمن الرحیم هست صلای سر خوان کریم ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (fol.1a).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Splendid copy of the collected poetic works (prose works are not included despite use of term "kullīyāt" in \'title page\' inscription) of Mawlānā Nūr al-Dīn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān Jāmī (d.1492). Opens with the opening of one of his seven mas̲navīs, Tuḥfat al-aḥrār (contribution to the cataloguing from H. Mottaghi and İ. E. Binbaş).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 297', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.690, copied by Muḥammad Raḥīm ibn Muḥammad Ẕurrīyah [?] with transcription completed 6 Shaʻbān 1209 [?] [ca. 26 February 1795 ?].', 'Former shelfmark: "151 T. D. M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "15/7" inscribed in ink on \'title page\' (p.1).', 'Binding: Heavy pasteboards covered in painted lacquerwork, spine and hinges in dark red brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; two-piece binding (overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; doublures in fine painted lacquerwork of composition evoking book cover design with central mandorla and pendants (filled with flowers and leaves in bronze / gold on a black ground) as well as vegetal border ; upper and lower covers also in fine painted lacquerwork of composition evoking book cover design with central mandorla, pendants and cornerpieces (filled with flowers and leaves in bronze / gold on a dark red ground) surrounded by swirling floral vegetal pattern in bronze / gold ; flyleaves in shell marbled paper (mainly in pink, blue) ; sewn in red and green thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in light green and pink, good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion and losses to lacquerwork and pasteboard, etc. ; binding may be earlier than text block.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of smiling lion guardant passant (see p.8-9, 24-25, etc.) ; creamy, lightly burnished, thin and transluscent though sturdy.', 'Decoration: Splendid illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of large rectangular panel with gold cartouche carrying section heading in red flanked by light blue pendants and surrounded by swirling arabesque in gold with red, green, yellow, pink, etc. floral accents on a dark blue ground, surmounted by vertically elongated w-shaped piece filled with elaborate floral vegetal design in shades of pink, lavender, blue, green, yellow, etc. on fields of dark blue and gold, all set in a well of heavy gold interlace ; a smaller version of the central headpiece same appears in the margin ; illuminated marginal decoration on incipit and facing page consisting of a swirling vegetal composition in gold with blue accents ; additional exquisite double-page illuminations at openings of Gulistān (p.46-47) and Būstān (p.152-153) ; smaller, simpler illuminated headpieces at section openings ; occasional illuminated accents with arabesque or chī cloud designs appear in triangular panels of the marginal written area ; written area of incipit and facing page set off by gold cloud-bands ; written area (columns within and margin) surrounded by gold frame ; keywords and section headings rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, mainly closed counters, pointing in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, with up to 28 lines on the diagonal in the margin ; frame-ruled ; written area occasionally divided to two columns to set off verses.', 'Collation: 43 IV(344), I (346), i ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," in Arabic and Persian, reads "وقع الفراق من تسويد هذا الكتاب كليات شيخ سعدى رحمه الله بتاريخ يوم پنجشنبه ششم شهر شعبان المعظم سنه ١٢٩ من الهجرة النبوية المصطفوية عليه السلام بر يد الضعيف النخيف الراجى الى رحمة الملك المتعال محمد رحيم ابن محمد ژریه حفظه الله تعالى من جميع الافات ... انشا الله تعالى"', 'Explicit: "طبل فرد می ماند تمت هزلیات و مضحكات"', 'Incipit: "سپاس بیغایت و ستایش بینهایت آفریدگاری اجل جلاله و عم نواله ..."', 'Title from colophon on p.690.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the collected works of Saʻdī.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 335', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.519, copied by one Muḥammad, known as ʻIṭrī (Mehmet Itri). Date of transcription is not specified though paper, decoration etc. may suggest 17th or even late 16th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "107 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark maroon leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in pink coated and textured paper (embossed in a repeating leaf pattern) ; upper and lower covers carry central gold-painted spray of leaves and flowers set in a rectangular panel defined by gold fillets with tooled rosette accent cornerpieces and tooled border in gold ; text block edges gold-painted in vegetal designs ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and red, good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with loss of flap, much abrasion, some staining, lifting of leather, etc. ; some subtle repairs to spine.', 'Support: non-European laid paper of perhaps a few types ; mainly non-European laid paper with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal or vertical) and occasional chain lines visible (even in pairs, see p.136), heavily sized and burnished, medium cream in color, quite sturdy / dense and fairly thick ; leaf carrying pp.349-350 delaminating ; added / replacement leaves at close in European laid paper with "TSC" or "TSG" (possibly below an eagle, see p.520-524) ; repairs.', 'Decoration: Superbly executed illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of large rectangular piece with central gold cartouche (empty) surrounded by swirling floral vegetal decoration in gold, pink, yellow, red, and light blue on lapis lazuli and gold (evoking book cover design), bordered in a dark blue / lapis band with white accents and surmounted by a row of gold lozenges filled with similar floral vegetal decoration itself surmounted a light blue band separating it from a scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) carrying the same manner of swirling floral vegetal decoration on fields of gold and lapis lazuli, all set in a well of red with white accents and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in dark blue ; additional exquisite headpieces at openings of other sections (see pp.86, 138, 352) ; written area throughout surrounded by frame consisting of a heavy gold band defined by black fillets, rules defining columns within also in gold.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Ottoman hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page, with written area mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, V-1 (9), 4 V(49), IV (57), 20 V(257), II-1+2 (262), ii ; chiefly quinions ; leaves between sections (see pp.85, 135-137, 348-351) and final leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, mainly in Arabic, reads "تمت الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب على يد اضعف العباد محمد الشهير بعطرى غفر ذنوبه تم تم"', 'Explicit: "یا صاحب ننگ و نام می باید بود یا شهره خاص و عام می باید بود القصه کمال جهد می باید کرد در وادی خود تمام می باید بود"', 'Incipit: "الهی سینۀ ده آتش افروز در ان سینه دلی و ان دل همه سوز ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the collected poetic works (dīvān) of Vaḥshī Bāfqī (d.1583), opening with his mas̲navī Farhād va Shīrīn.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 645', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. may suggest 15th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and label on lower cover, "IL 310" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in now much damaged green-blue paper with tan leather over spine and traces of dark red-brown leather over edges/turn-ins ; Type II binding (originally with flap, though now lost) ; board linings in yellow laid paper ; sewn in heavy light pink thread ; overall in quite poor condition with significant abrasion and staining, lifting and losses of leather, paper and boards, delamination of boards, fully detached from textblock, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (20 in 26 mm., vertical) and chain lines (two groups of three visible) with 6-8 mm. between chains and 44-55 between groups (quite curved, horizontal, see pp.8-9, 6-11 and 68-69) ; inclusions, well-burnished, fairly smooth.', "Script: Naskh ; an elegant 'Syrian' or Egyptian [?] hand ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline, quite rounded with curvilinear descenders, elongation of horiztonal strokes, open and closed counters, freely ligatured, pointing mainly in distinct dots though three dots represented by a curved stroke, sīn also marked, bar (shaqq) of kāf often detached from vertical stroke, final hāʼ looking like two inverted commas one atop the other ; extensively vocalized.", 'Layout: Written mainly in 11 lines per page.', 'Collation: V-1 (9), 5 V(59), III+2 (67) ; chiefly quinions ; quire numbering in the form of whole words in the upper outer corner of the recto of the opening leaf of the first two and final quires ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "اخر المنتقى من لذة السمع في وصف الدمع للمرحوم الشيخ صلاح الدين الصفدي رحمه الله تعالى والحمد لله وحده وصلوته على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلامه وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل"', 'Incipit: "قال الشيخ الامام الاديب البليغ صلاح الدين الصفدي تغمده الله تعالى برحمته ورضوانه الحمد لله الذي جعلني ممن شما بالعلم وسمح ... وبعد فاني لما رأيت الشعراء قد اطنبوا في ذكر الدمع ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the treatise (consisting mainly of verses) on tears by the well-known philologist and littérateur Ṣalāḥ al-Dīn Khalīl ibn Aybak al-Ṣafadī (d.1363).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 355', 'Origin: Date (likely of composition) at close of second work obscured, though according to inscription on \'title page\' "برای سلطان روم بايزيد خان" and dedication in opening matter, composed (and this copy possibly executed) for Sultan Bayezit II (r.1481-1512). Decoration would suggest late 15th or early 16th century. Opening work likely contemporary or possibly slightly later.', 'Accompanying materials: Slip of wove paper with note describing manuscript in black ink, possibly in hand of G. Meredith-Owens, reads "355 On tinted paper 1) Lavāʼiḥ A system of Ṣūfī doctrines by Jāmī. 2) Yūnus ve Muʼnis, a mas̲navī poem by Jāmī (of Rūm) for Bayezīd II followed by a qaṣīdeh in honor of the same. Copied probably in Turkey 16th century"', 'Former shelfmark: "502 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; ٥٧٩ on spine label.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in faint-pink, coated and textured paper (embossed with scrolling vines) ; upper and lower covers carry tooled and gold-painted borders ; paper label on spine ; sewn in light pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, fair condition ; overall in fairly good condition with only minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper, mainly with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, curved) and no chain lines plainly visible, cloudy formation, thin and crisp, tinted mainly pale pink / salmon, quite well-burnished ; in opening section, written area mounted in frame of contrasting color (blue, pink, yellow, etc.) ; pastedowns, flyleaves, and later repairs in European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Elegant (though somewhat damaged and repaired) illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of first work (fol.1b) consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by gold pendants and surmounted by swirling vegetal motifs on a light blue ground bordered in bands of white (with black crosses) and heavy gold interlace, surmounted by a scalloped triangular hasp set in a rectangular band filled with swirling floral vegetal motifs in red, white, etc. on a gold ground with turquoise, black and light blue accents, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in light blue ; written area throughout surrounded by gold frame, divisions within defined by narrower gold bands ; in opening work, written area typically tinted light green, light yellow, light blue, etc. set into a frame of paper tinted a contrasting light pink, light blue, etc. with an outermost rule in light blue or white that contrasts with tint of margin ; marginal glosses in decorative shapes ; exquisite illuminated headpiece at opening of second work on fol.30b consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche (in fashion of mandorla with pendants) carrying the basmalah in white nastaʻlīq/talik amidst delicate floral vegetal decorations set on a dark blue ground overlaid with delicate arabesques, all bordered in bands of gold, turquoise and dark blue and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in dark blue ; similar illuminated headpiece at opening of closing panegyric with gold cartouche carrying heading in white ("وفى مدحه خلد ملكه") surrounded by delicate floral motifs in gold, bordered in bands of gold and dark blue with minimal vertical stalks ; headings in final works chrysographed.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; exquisite hand in a medium line ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, sweeping bar on kāf, pointing in distinct dots, point of final nūn set in a wide, deep bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 11 and 9 lines per page with written area occasionally divided to two columns to set-off poetry ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV (8), 2 III(20), IV (28), I (30), IV-1 (37), 2 IV(53), III (59), III+1 (66), 1 (67), i ; mid-quire marks in the form of oblique strokes in black ink (upper outer margin of the right-hand leaf) ; catchwords present.', "Dedication: Second work composed for Sultan Bayezit II (r.1481-1512), see inscription on 'title page' (fol.30a) and opening matter (fol.33b).", 'Incipit: [Lavāyiḥ-i Jāmī] "لا احصى ثناء عليك كيف و كل ثناء يعود اليك جل عن ثنائى جناب قدسك انت ... این رساله ایست مسمی بلوایح در بیان معارف و معانی که بر الواح ..." ; [Yūnis va Mūnis] "بنام کردگار انجام افروز بهم پیوسته کردان شب و روز ...آغاز حکایت یونس و مونس چنین دیدم ز تاریخ غزانی ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '5. fol.59b-fol.63a : [panegyric for Bayezit II opening with heading "Va fī madḥih khalada mulkuh..."] / Jāmī [?].', '4. fol.59a : [blank].', '3. fol.30a-fol.58b : Kitāb-i Yūnis va Mūnis / az taʼlīfāt-i Mawlānā Jāmī.', '2. fol.29b : [blank].', '1. fol.1b-fol.29a : Lavāyiḥ dar bayān-i maʻārif va maʻānī / Jāmī.', "Superbly executed composite codex opening with Jāmī's Lavāʼiḥ, followed by Kitāb-i Yūnis va Mūnis also attributed to Jāmī and dedicated to Sultan Bayezit II (r.1481-1512), in fact closing with a panegyric for him."])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Three crescents. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Contains tables, two left blank.', 'In Maghribī script.', 'Text rubricated in red, yellow, and green; marginal notes and corrections in hand of copyist; vol. has edge title: sharḥ Quṭb al-Maṭāliʻ fī al-manṭiq.', 'Date based on Quaritch catalog description.', '"Commentary on Maṭāliʻ al-anwār, a work on logic by Sirāj al-Dīn Maḥmūd ibn abī Bakr, al-Urmawī." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; reading / study notice at close of poem on p.105 provides a rough terminus ante quem of 1457-8. Attribution of the poems provided by the same copyist following Lawʻat al-shākī, paper, etc. also suggest early to mid 15th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From front flyleaf (p.1) and label on lower cover, "IL 311c" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; boards lined in now dull gray and untinted paper with hinges in untinted paper (both trimmed in a scalloped pattern) and untinted paper ; upper and lower covers carry tooled central ornament consisting of a six-petaled flower built up from a series of striated (possibly epigraphic) circular stamps with tooled dots and radiating strokes, as well as scalloped cornerpieces and tooled border in a series of blind rules ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; endbands gone ; overall in poor condition with loss of flap, significant staining and abrasion (lower cover in particular), lifting and losses of leather (especially at spine, exposing spine lining), delamination of boards, etc. ; fill to lower cover in brown leather.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper, possibly of more than one type, mainly with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (20 in 26 mm., vertical) and chain lines grouped in threes with 9-11 mm. between chains and 48-52 mm. between groups (see pp.10-11), all not very straight, lightly burnished, fairly smooth ; some leaves tinted orange/beige ; added bifolium at opening on European laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), single chain lines spaced 30 mm. apart, and watermark only partially visible.', 'Decoration: Abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke over keywords, etc.) rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', "Script: Naskh ; medium, clear 'Syrian' or Egyptian hand ; virtually serifless with mainly curvilinear descenders, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots, very slight effect of words descending to baseline and of letters inclining to the right, final kāf often mashqūqah, medial kāf often mabsūṭah, many closed counters ; extensively vocalized.", 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; written area often divided to set off verses.', 'Collation: I (2), V-4 (8), I (10), IV (18), I+1 (21), 3 V(51), I+1 (54), II (58) ; catchwords present (though absent or cut off at opening) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes added leaves at opening).', 'Explicit: [Lawʻat al-shākī wa-damʻat al-bākī] "عسى الليالي التي اضنت بفرقتنا جسمي ستجمعني يوما وتجمعه وذلك من لطف الله الكبير وهو عليم بالحال خبير وبالاجابة حقيق وجدير وهو على جمعهم اذا يشاء قدير نجزت الرسالة الموسومة بلوعة الشاكي ودمعة الباكي بحمد لله سبحانه وتعالى وعونه والحمد لله رب العالمين [؟] والصلاة والسلام الاتمان الاكملان الاطيبان الافضلان على سيدنا محمد خاتم النبيين والمرسلين وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين"', 'Incipit: [Lawʻat al-shākī wa-damʻat al-bākī] "ولا بد من شكوى الى ذي مروءة يواسيك او يسليك او يتوجع الحمد لله الذي قضى بالمحبة والولوع وحكم باحراق كبد كل عاشق ومولوع ... ولا ممن يشطوا على عقله الوسواس بل انت من جبلة السراة واساطينهم ..."', 'Title from closing matter on pp.92-93.', 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.106-p.116 : [assorted excerpts, supplied in a different hand and ink].', '3. p.103-p.105 : [qaṣīdah attributed to Shams al-Dīn [?] al-Bāʻūnī ] / Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Shihāb al-Dīn Abī al-ʻAbbās Aḥmad al-Bāʻūnī [?].', '2. p.94-p.103 : [takhmīs for the famous qaṣīdah by Ibn Zurayq] / Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Shihāb al-Dīn Abī al-ʻAbbās Aḥmad al-Bāʻūnī [?].', '1. p.5-p.93 : Lawʻat al-shākī wa-damʻat al-bākī / Ṣalāḥ al-Dīn Khalīl ibn Aybak al-Ṣafadī.', "Fine but acephalous (though a small portion of the lacking opening has been supplied later on p.4) copy of al-Ṣafadī's (d.1363) maqāmah in rhymed prose and verse on the pangs of love between young men. Followed by two poetic works apparently attributed in the manuscript (see p.94 and p.103) to Shams al-Dīn Abū ʻAbd Allāh Muḥammad ibn Shihāb al-Dīn Abī al-ʻAbbās Aḥmad al-Bāʻūnī (d.1466), though the first of these, a takhmīs on the famous qaṣīdah of ʻAlā al-Dīn ʻAlī Ibn Zurayq (ca. 1029), is elsewhere attributed to his father, Shihāb al-Dīn Abī al-ʻAbbās Aḥmad (d.1413) (see GAL I 81, S I 133 and EI2 vol.I, p. 1109, col. 1). The final leaves of the codex contain additional assorted excerpts supplied in a different hand and ink."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 417', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, etc. suggest late 16th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "٤٨٨" inscribed in black ink on upper cover label ; "141 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf (p.2) ; "٤٠٩" in black on upper cover.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather ; Type II binding (once with flap, now lost) ; doublures in dark red leather ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold painted (with recessed onlays) mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. NSd 7) and pendants, as well as tooled border ; sewn in heavy cream thread, two stations ; overall in quite poor condition with much abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, loss of flap, spine lining exposed, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal or vertical, indistinct, some curving) and no chain lines plainly visible, cloudy formation, transluscent, sturdy, beige in color, burnished ; front flyleaf and repairs in European laid paper.', "Decoration: Exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.4 consisting of large rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by scalloped domes (in gold and red) and surrounded by swirling floral vegetal decoration in gold, red, white, turquoise, lavender, etc. on a lapis lazuli ground and bordered in a band of heavy gold interlace, surmounted by rectangular piece evoking a row of scalloped domes in gold and lapis lazuli filled with swirling floral vegetal decoration in gold, turquoise, lavender, white, red, etc., entire piece surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and vegetal decoration in gold ; four half-page miniatures (wider than the written area), including miniature depicting Laylá and Qays (Majnūn) at school on p.27, miniature depicting Majnūn in the wilderness on p.60, miniature depicting Majnūn's family visiting him in the wilderness on p.81, and miniature depicting Laylá visiting Majnūn in the wilderness on p.111 ; written area surrounded by a gold frame defined by black fillets with outermost blue rule, divisions within defined by narrow gold bands outlined in black fillets ; keywords and section headings chrysographed.", 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; exquisite hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 14 lines per page, mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, I (2), 3 IV(26), III+1 (33), IV-1 (40), 2 IV(56), III (62) ; chiefly quaternions and ternions ; final leaves lacking ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and skips two pages between pp.119-120).', 'Incipit: "اى نشاء حسنى عشقه تاثير قلن عشق ايله نباى دهرى تعمير قلن ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant (though incomplete, with end lacking) copy of Fuzulî's renowned Turkish rendering of the romance of Laylá and Majnūn. Illustrated with four miniatures (see p.27, p.60, p.80 and p.111)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 449', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; decoration, paper, etc. would certainly suggest 18th century and dated watermark would more specifically suggest ca. 1745 (within a couple of decades following).', 'Accompanying materials: Blank slip of pink wove paper stamped with shelfmark "449" (paginated pp.335-336).', 'Former shelfmark: "202 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in tan leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in deep red leather with outline of mandorla and pendants (interior flecked with silver) as well as tooled border in gold ; flyleaves in pink surface-dyed European laid paper with design echoing that of the doublures ; upper and lower covers carry splendid stamped (recessed onlays in red leather) and gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal decoration reminiscent of Déroche class. NSd 2) and pendants as well as gold-tooled accents and guilloché roll border ; sewn in dark pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in dark cream and pale yellow, good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, upper joint splitting and cover detaching, joints at fore edge flap also damaged, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types, all with raisin watermarks and accompanying names ; one type with roughly 12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 24-25 mm. apart (vertical), and watermarks of grapes (raisin) with cartouche and crown above (see p.12, 52, etc.) and of crown, grapes and name (see p.16, 18, 24, etc.), crisp and sturdy, well-burnished, dark cream to beige in color ; another type with 11-12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 21-22 mm. apart (vertical) and watermark of large crown above name and grapes (see p.40, 192, 248, 310, 294, etc.) ; other watermarks include crown over cartouche with "P G" and grapes below (p.210, etc.) and watermark of grapes with crown, name and date "1745" above (see p.486, 488, 496) ; rare bifolia tinted pale pink, mint green, or bright yellow ; wax spilled on p.150.', 'Decoration: Superbly executed illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.2 consisting of w-shaped piece with empty cartouche in gold surrounded by a rich floral vegetal pattern in shades of blue, pink, lavender, red, green, and white on a field of gold ; entire piece set into well of blue, red and gold and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and red ; margins of the incipit and facing page are filled with a swirling floral pattern in gold with pink accents ; section headings, keywords and letters, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs, letter hāʼ, etc. ; overlining in red ; written area surrounded by a heavy gold frame ; diagram on p.109.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine, compact Turkish hand ; virtually serifless with curvilinear descenders ; freely ligatured with alif often joined to following lām, tail of waw or rāʼ assimilated with following hāʼ, point of nūn assimilated with bowl, etc. ; pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots ; some passages partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 35 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 29 V(290), i ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Explicit: "سايه مبارك پاينده بادشايان اولدوغى كبى وهكذا قد سهل الله سبحانه وتعالى علينا ما رمناه من المقاصد الغالية والحمد كل الحمد لربنا رب المبدعات من العشرة العالية والمكونات من التسع الدايرة والمحدثات من السفليات البالية والصلوة صفو الصلوة على سيد الصافات من النفوس الفاضلة وقوم الفارسات من العقول الهادية نبى جلا ويا جير الرنية [ويا خير البرية؟] وازال عمارها وعلى اله وصحبه ما انزلت السماء سماها واخرجت الارض سماءها"', 'Incipit: "باب الالف فصل آا الممدودتين آءة اصلى آتى در قلب مكانى ايله يا تقديم اوهوب همزه يه قلب اهمشدر كليجى معناسنه زمان آتيه و اخبار مستقبله ده استعمال اولنور اذا اعلمتك الحادثات بما مضى اى من الشدايد والضيق ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the alphabetically arranged encyclopedic glossary on Vaṣṣāf’s renowned history, Tajziyat al-amṣār wa-tazjiyat al-aʻṣār, by Ahmet bin Mirza Mehmet bin Habib Nâilî Efendi (Aḥmad Nīlī [or Nāʼilī] ibn Mīrzā Muḥammad ibn Ḥabīb, d.1748).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 20', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.302a (p.613), copied by Qār ʻAlī bin Pīr ʻAlī [?]. Transcription finished ("waqaʻa al-farāgh min hādhihi al-nuskhah al-sharīfah...") Rabīʻ II 875 [Sep-Oct 1470].', 'Accompanying materials: Several inserts with notes, quotations, etc. most included in pagination.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 131. Collection of Traditions from Ibn Malik."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in light brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in light brown leather ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla (lower cover with paper onlay) and pendants filled with floral vegetal composition (compare Déroche class OSh5) ; pendant on envelope flap ; sewn in white thread, two stations, original sewing may have been four stations ; endbands of white and dark orange, tailband lost, some remains of headband ; spine and fore-edge flap have been repaired with later leather ; fore-edge flaps with some cracks and lifting of leather ; spine covering almost entirely lost, some remains of original layer of leather and green linen lining ; loss and delamination of boards at all corners.', 'Support: European laid paper in at least two types ; mainly with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines spaced 45 mm. apart, with scissors watermark (compare Piccard no. 122413, Rom 1478) ; fol.9-fol.78 supplied in a different paper ; antique repairs and fills made to leaves in laid paper.', 'Decoration: Chapter and section headings rubricated ; text commented on overlined in red ; full use of rubrication ends part way through text.', 'Script: Naskh ; two main hands ; majority hand partially serifed with right-sloping head serif on alif, closed counters, pointing in distinct dots, some vowel markings ; text of fol.9-fol.78 supplied in a different hand, sans serif, with open counters, strokes rather than dots.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 9 IV (72), III (78), 4 IV (110), IV + 2 (120), 22 IV (296), III (302) ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaf and inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "تم الكتاب المزين المرفوع المودود و ربنا المحمود و له الكرم والفضل والجود الحمد لله على التمام و على رسوله و اصحابه افضل السلام وقع الفراغ من تحرير هذه النسخة الشريفة المباركة الميمونة على يد العبد الضعيف المذنب المحتاج الى رحمة ربه الحليم الرحيم الكريم قار على بن پير على غفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه في اليوم الثلثاء في شهر الربيع الاخر اللهم احسن على حالي في الاول والاخر بعد مرور الاخراء من الظهر القريب الى الوقت الاخر اللهم ارزق ايمانا في الوقت الاخر اللهم ارحم لمن قال امينا امين في تاريخ سنة خمس و سبعين و ثمانية"', 'Explicit: "صح الروايات فيه في اول الباب التاسع تم تم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله على هدية الهداية والاسلام و عطية الدراية ولاعلام خصوصا من بيان حديث خير الانام محمد المختص بمقام على المقام عليه احاسن التحيات و اكامل الاسلام ... و بعد يقول الضعيف العويزعبد اللطيف بن عبد العزيز المعروف بابن الملك ... لما وضع وجوه المعالي [المقال؟] و صح النظر في المآل صودف العلم اعلاها منارة و منالا ... ومما صنف فيه من الكتب الفاخرة و الزبر الوافدة كتاب مشارق الانوار في صحاح الاخبار فانه مرتب بالتراتيب البديعة ... ... فصرت ادير في نفسي واستخير الله يومي وامسي ان اشرحه شرحا ... وسميته مبارق الازهار في شرح مشارق الانوار"', 'Title from opening on fol.1b (p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the commentary by Ibn Malak on al-Ṣaghānī's ḥadīth treatise which integrates the ṣaḥīḥ of Bukhārī and the ṣaḥīḥ of Muslim as well as incorporating traditions from other collections. Description provided mainly by Sarah Mirza."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 402', 'Origin: Date at close, 1205 [1790 or 91] during the reign of Sultan Selim III (r.1789-1807). Most likely executed by the master calligrapher Mehmet Esat Yesari (d.1798) as proposed by Muhittin Serin (see note on catalog card dated "20.4.1993") and Mohamed Zakariya and confirmed by Uğur Derman.', 'Former shelfmark: "538 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on upper cover.', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in cream silk with dark red leather over spine and edges / turn-ins (silk faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; boards and recto of opening and final panel lined in marbled paper (kumlu or kılçıklı ebru in pink, light blue, and dark blue) ; upper and lower covers carry gold-tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; panels hinged together with dark red leather ; in somewhat poor condition with lifting of silk and leather, delamination of boards, much abrasion, staining, panels detaching from spine, etc.', 'Support: Well-burnished laid paper (with roughly 8 vertical laid lines per cm.) mounted on heavy paper with pieced marbled paper (kumlu or kılçıklı ebru in blue and cream) framing the written area.', 'Decoration: Written area surrounded by frame consisting of inner orange band and heavy gold outer band, outlined in black fillets.', 'Script: Exquisite specimen of Ottoman calligraphy ; text throughout in an elegant, large nastaʻlīq (celi talik) in a heavy line ; pin-pricks surround each letter, presumably for transfer to the commemorative stone by pouncing.', 'Layout: Written in a single line per page (opens vertically with lines running parallel to the spine).', "Collation: Eight heavy leaves or 'panels' hinged together.", 'Explicit: "قيروب بيك ايكيوز بش سالى دستى پيك اديم يرده"', 'Incipit: "جناب حضرت سلطان سليم خان جهانبانك ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Exquisite album of calligraphy (muraqqaʻ or murakkaa) with design for a monumental inscription to appear in stone on a commemorative range marker (menzil taşı) of Bilâl Ağa (d.1807?), likely executed by Yesari Mehmed Esad Efendi (d.1798), the great Ottoman master of nastaʻlīq (talik).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 484', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, hand, etc. of original sections suggest 17th century and date in seal impression provides only approximate terminus ante quem of 1684. Replacement sections likely 18th century as suggested by paper and hand.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2).', 'Former shelfmark: From spine label and inner front cover, "IL 312" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (in light blue, blue-green, blue, pink and yellow) with dark purple leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in fuschia surface-dyed laid paper ; bronze / gold tooling on interior and exterior of fore edge flap ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and purple, quite good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of leather (spine in particular), staining, etc. ; fore edge flap far too narrow.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; one type with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-25 mm. apart (horizontal), and hand / glove watermark (see p.39, 186, etc.), sturdy and fairly thick, burnished ; another type with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-28 mm. apart (horizontal, quite thick), and crown-star [possibly crown-star-crescent] watermark (see p.33, 43, 242, 243, etc.) ; staining and tidelines ; replacement sections on paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23 mm. apart (horizontal) and grapes (raisin) under crown watermark ; watermarks of "P & G" under double-headed eagle with single crown above (see back flyleaf) and shield likely with crescent with face inside (see front flyleaf).', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece at opening on p.4 consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouched flanked by floral accents in red (now pinkish), white, orange and lavender, surrounded by pinkish red border and surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece with floral vegetal decoration (in white, orange, gold, and pink) on fields of gold and blue, itself surmounted by crude vertical stalks (tīgh) with blue accents ; keywords and abbreviation symbols (mainly sigla) rubricated ; some overlining in red ; textual dividers in the form of gold discs ; text of written area (through p.88) surrounded by gold frame.', 'Script: Naskh ; two main Turkish hands ; original sections (including opening to p.88, 109-308, etc.) in an elegant Turkish naskh, seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on most ascenders (even free-standing alif), effect of tilt to the left, rounded with manily curvilinear descenders, many open counters, pointing in conjoined dots or strokes ; replacement sections (pp.89-108, 309-392, 477-519, 531 to close except where some original leaves appear) mainly in a clear Turkish naskh, virtually serifless with effect of only slight tilt to the left (fairly vertical), occasional words descending to baseline, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 21 lines per page.', 'Collation: ii, VI+1 (13), 5 V(63), VII (75), 15 V(225), I (227), V (237), V+1 (247), 3 V(277), IV+2 (287), I (289), IV+1 (298), ii ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert and mistakenly skips two pages each between pp.205-206 and pp.241-242).', 'Explicit: "وكان اشد بالنصب خبر كان وامسه ضمير عائد الى المفعول المحذوف ما"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله على هدية الهداية والاسلام وعطية الدراية والاعلام ... وبعد يقول الضعيف العويز عبد اللطيف بن عبد العزيز المعروف بابن الملك ... لما وضح وجوه المقال وصح النظر في المآل صودف العلم اعلاها منارة ومنالا ... ومما صنف فيه من الكتب الفاخرة ... كتاب مشارق الانوار في صحاح الخبار ... وكانت له شروح ... فصرت ادير في نفسي واستخير الله يومي وامسي ان اشرحه شرحا ... سميته مبارق الازهر في شرح مشارق الانوار ..."', 'Title from opening matter (preface) on p.5.', 'Ms. composite codex.', 'Fine composite copy of the commentary by Ibn Malak on al-Ḥasan ibn Muḥammad al-Ṣaghānī’s (d.1252) collection of traditions from Bukhārī and Muslim. Incomplete, ending abruptly.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 979', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 128', 'Binding: Boards covered in black textured cloth ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a geometric pattern (resembling a scale pattern) in dull gold ; cover gold-stamped with "المبدأ والمعاد" ; sewn in white thread over two recessed cords ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Machine wove paper.', 'Decoration: Text executed entirely in a pinkish-red ink.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a thin to medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 10-11 lines per page.', "Collation: i, X (20), IV-1 (27), i ; one gathering of ten bifolia followed by an anomalous quaternion ; pages between sections (corresponding to gatherings) left blank, one serving as section 'title page' (see p.41) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "وهذا الروح هو الذي قوبل في الملائكة جميعهم في عدة آيات من الكتاب المجيد ... وقال تنزل الملائكة والروح وبه صلى الله عليه وسلم نختتم الكلام نسأل [؟] بجاه عند ذي الجلال والاكرام سائلين التوفيق والهداية الى طريق التحقيق آمين"', 'Incipit: "وانما القرب من الله جل وعلا بالعبد من صفات البهائم والسباع والشياطين ... المقصد الثاني في افعاله تعالى تشتمل هذه المقدمة على عدة تقسيمات الاول الموجودات الجوهرية ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy of what appears to be the latter sections from an abridgment of Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī's (d.1641) al-Mabdaʼ wa-al-maʻād, opening in al-Maqālah al-thālithah of al-Fann al-awwal (compare Isl. Mss. 980 and 965)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 974', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 123', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "مدارك العلوم | J.H.D." ; seemingly sewn over three recessed cords, tightly bound and difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Wove paper of at least three different types.', 'Decoration: Text executed entirely in a pinkish-red ink.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a medium to bold line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 10-15 lines per page.', "Collation: i, 5 IV(40), 2 V(60), VI (72), 3 (75), i ; chiefly quaternions ; pages between sections (corresponding to gatherings) left blank, some serving as section 'title pages' (see pp.17, 33, 47, 63, 79, 97, 117, 141) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly skips two pages between pp.39-40 and 95-96).", 'Explicit: "والكون الى الدنيا حبالة الوهم التي يقود بها الناس الى حزن طويل بل خالد"', 'Incipit: "الغرض من المنطق التمييز بين الصدق والكذب في الاقوال والخير والشر في الافعال ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of a philosophical treatise on logic (perhaps representing abridgment of another), lacking preamble and ending somewhat abruptly.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 933', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 82', 'Binding: Boards covered in green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "مدخل الفلسفة العصرية | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; compact hand in a thin to bold line (line thickness changes) ; serifless and freely ligatured with slight effect of tilt to the right and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 27 lines per page.', "Collation: Pages between sections left blank, some to serve as work / section 'title pages' (see pp.1, 73, 145, 165, 185, 201, 217, 225, 245, 265, 285, 301, 321, 341, 361, 377) ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals with letter ك for a couple of quires in second work (see p.89 and p.105) ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, in opening two works (through p.108), distinct for each ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly follows p.231 with p.223 and thereafter off by eight pages).", 'Explicit: "وانها ذات وجود خاص بنفسها فقط انتهت هذه النبذة المنطقية الهيجلية"', 'Incipit: "مقدمة ان المصاعب التي تحيط بهمة تقديم صورة عامة عن مذهب التحقق المعاصر في مقام دقيق ومجال قصير لجيرة خطيرة جدا والسبب في ذلك غالبا يرجع الى ان مذهب التحقق هذا ليس كلا تعليم منظم ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', '11. p.377-p.423 : Nutfah min manṭiq Hayjal.', '10. p.376 : [blank].', '9. p.145-p.375 : [possible continuation of Madkhal al-falsafah al-ʻaṣrīyah, or another work on modern philosophy, in fourteen sections beginning with the second].', '8. p.144 : [blank].', '7. p.141-p.143 : Min awāʼil Risālat al-Mashāʻir al-Ṣadrīyah / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī.', '6. p.140-p.141 : Min ʻUyūn al-masāʼil / lil-Muʻallim al-Thānī.', '5. p.139-p.140 : Min Kitāb al-Nushūʼ al-ibdāʻī / taʼlīf Hinrī Bīrjisūn.', '4. p.129-p.139 : Min Tārīkh Rānd fī ʻumad mutaʼakhkhirī al-ḥukamāʼ.', '3. p.73-p.128 : Talkhīṣ Kutub Arisṭū al-ṭabīʻīyah / Ibn Rushd.', '2. p.72 : [blank].', '1. p.1-p.71 : Madkhal al-falsafah al-ʻaṣrīyah.', "Careful copy of a collective volume (majmūʻah) of philosophical works, chiefly comprising an Arabic work on modern philosophy addressing Kant, Fichte, Herbart, Schopenhauer, Hegel, Hartmann, etc. interspersed (perhaps intentionally) with excerpts from Ibn Rushd's (Abū al-Walīd Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad, al-Ḥafīd, known in the West as Averroës) celebrated shorter commentaries on Aristotle's treatises on the natural sciences and a selection of excerpts addressing Benjamin Rand's (1856-1934) Modern classical philosophers, Henri Bergson's (1859–1941) Evolution créatrice, al-Fārābī's ʻUyūn al-masāʼil, and Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī's Kitāb al-Mashāʻir (compare the contents of Isl. Ms. 972), and finally closing with a brief excerpt (in Arabic) from Hegel's Logic (Wissenschaft der Logik)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 913', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; both texts likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and at some stage bound together for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 62', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "مدخل الفلسفة الحديثة | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Each section in a distinct type of paper ; section carrying opening work mainly on a coated laid paper stamped "محل محمود محمد الوكيل وفرحات ابراهيم بمصر" with a few sheets of lined wove paper mixed in ; section carrying second work on lined / ruled wove paper.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; two quick, modern hands in a medium to bold line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in mainly 16 and 26 lines per page.', "Collation: Two distinct sections, each carrying a work, now bound together ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals in opening section carrying Min Makātīb ʻAbd al-Bahāʼ which has verso of each leaf left blank ; opening leaf of a draft of another text on modern philosophy (see Isl. Ms. 916) mistakenly inserted after the opening leaf of the Bahai text (see p.3) ; pages between sections of second work (Madkhal al-falsafah al-ḥadīthah) left fully or partially blank to serve as 'title pages' (see pp.45, 65, 85, 105, 125, 145, 161 ), irregular internal pagination, Hindu-Arabic numerals, in some sections ; pagination in pencil (entire volume), Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "وللمنطق وضع كتابه المعروف رسالة القوة العاقلة البشرية وكتاب المدعو عن مسلك القوة العاقلة"', 'Incipit: "مدخل الفلسفة الحديثة مذهب التحقيق الحديث مقدمة ان المصاعب التي تحيط بمهمة تقديم صورة شاملة عن مذهب التحقيق الحديث في مقام رقيق ومجال ضيق ... خطيرة جدا والسبب في ذلك غالبا هو ان مذهب التحقيق ليس كلا من تعليم منظم ..."', 'Title from opening on p.3.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '4. p.45-249 : [Madkhal ilá al-falsafah al-ḥadīthah].', '3. p.44 : [blank].', '2. p.3 : [opening leaf of a draft copy of Madkhal al-falsafah al-ḥadīthah, the rest of which has been bound in Isl. Ms. 916].', '1. p.1, 5-43 : [Min Makātīb ʻAbd al-Bahāʼ] / ʻAbduʼl-Bahá.', 'Careful copy of an anonymous text on modern philosophy (compare texts in Isl. Ms. 908 v.2 and Isl. Ms. 916) with a selection from the letters of ʻAbd al-Bahāʼ ʻAbbās Afandī (d.1921) bound in preceding it.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 908 v.2', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 57', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title, owner and decorative accents over raised bands "الاسفار | 2 | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine but appears to be over cords, in white thread, five stations ; stuck-on endbands ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined wove paper of several types.', 'Decoration: Some headings rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh and ruqʻah ; both in a medium to bold line ; naskh, a clear, modern hand, mainly serifless (though right-sloping head-serif appears on lām of occasional lām alif) and rounded with curvilinear descenders, open and closed counters, freely ligatured, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots ; ruqʻah, compact, quick hand, serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of inclination to the left, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 26 lines per page.', 'Collation: Pagination in pencil and black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Incipit: "قد لا يكون في غير محله ان نطيل البيان في هذا الملخص الاجمالي فنضيف الى ذلكم [ذلك] التبيان السالف مجملا من العبارات عما وقع الكلمة فلسفة في هذه المملكة من التحريف تارة ومن التطور في الاطوار المختلفة التي تقلبت فيها الى الوقت الحاضر تارة اخرى ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful (though seemingly acephalous) draft copy (مسودة) of an introductory work on philosophy addressing the history of philosophy (p.5), the Eastern philosophers (p.15), the Ancient Greek philosophers (Plato, Aristotle, etc.) (p.24), Medieval philosophers (p.145), Modern philosophy (p.191) and contemporary philosophy (p.497).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 396', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.83, copied by Hacı Mustafa İzzet (al-Sayyid al-Ḥājj Muṣṭafá ʻIzzat), khaṭīb (hatib) in the mosque of Abū Ayyūb Khālid ibn Zayd al-Anṣārī (Eyüp Sultan Camii), with transcription possibly completed in 1258 [1842 or 3] (see numerals at close of colophon) ; paper, decoration, etc. certainly suggest 19th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "9 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" on upper board lining.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in forest green leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings and outer flyleaves in light-blue surface-dyed, gold-flecked European laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry gold tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps flanked by gold fillets ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; only portion of worked headband remains, tailband gone ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat distinct, some curving) and no chain lines visible, cloudy formation, inclusions visible, crisp, transluscent and sturdy, highly sized and burnished to glossy, buff in color ; flyleaves in two different European laid papers.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece at opening on p.2, evoking a w-shaped piece consisting of an empty gold cartouche defined by plumes in shades of blue to white, surounded by flowers in shades of pink and lavender with leaves in shades of green on a gold ground, all surmounted by three vases with floral bouquets in shades of pink, lavender and blue ; written area surrounded by heavy gold frame defined by black fillets ; keywords and section headings rubricated ; overlining in red ; illuminated tailpiece consisting of swirling floral vegetal composition surrounding colophon (on p.83).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; compact, elegant hand in a heavy line ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 3 V(30), VI+1 (43), ii ; quinions followed by a senion ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "كتبه السيد الحاج مصطفى عزت الخطيب في جامع حضرت خالد الانصارى عفى عنه ٥٨"', 'Explicit: "غايتده لازم اولنى بلدر ديكك يتر عالى يتر سوز اكله اوزاتمه حكايتى"', 'Incipit: "حمد وثناى رب العالمين وصلوة وسلام سيد المرسلين ... عالى بك افندى مؤلف كنه الاخبار اولان ... از جمله منهاج السلوك الى ادب صحبة الملوك نام عربى تاليف لطيفى بعض ضمايم نافعه ايله تركى يه ترجمه ومحاسن الادب تسميه ايلمشلر اون بش فصل ايله مرتب بر نسخۀ جليله در ..."', 'Title from opening matter (p.2) and inscription above headpiece (also on p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of an extract of the work of "mirrors for princes" literature by the outstanding Ottoman intellectual and bureaucrat, Gelibolulu Âli Efendi Mustafa b. Ahmet b. Abdülmevlâ (d.1600), widely known as Mustafa Âli.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 360', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; G. Meredith-Owens (who also confirmed the identification) has proposed a date of late 18th century (see note on catalog card) as suggested by paper, painting style, etc.', 'Accompanying material: Slip of wove paper with manuscript description in black ink in hand of G. Meredith-Owens, "The romance of Māh-munīr the son of King ʻArabshāh and Khūb-chihreh, daughter of the merchant Abū Naṣr. This tale seems to be otherwise unknown and is probably an Indian composition. Late 18th - early 19th century with contemporary illustrations in the Kashmiri style."', 'Former shelfmark: "217 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Heavy pasteoards faced in dark maroon leather with green-blue leather over spine and edges / turn-ins and turquoise leather (shagreen) over board corners (leather faced and edged framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in purple surface-dyed paper with central diamond shape ornament and pendants cut from gold textured paper and applied ; upper and lower covers carry stamped central ornament (diamond / floral shape) and pendants (with recessed onlays) and blind tooled border ; sewn in dark purple thread, two stations ; worked endbands in magenta and dark purple, good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with much abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather and pigment, covers detaching, severe spine slant (cocked), etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian) laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct) and no chain lines visible, thin and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished ; numerous fills and other repairs.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening consisting of small rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying the basmalah flanked by floral motifs in pink, yellow, blue, and red on fields of dark blue, surmounted by tall scalloped w-shaped piece filled with delicate floral vegetal decoration in pink, red, orange, white, green, etc. on grounds of gold and dark blue with red and white vegetal accents, set in a well of black bands flanking a heavy gold band with floral motifs ; written area throughout surrounded by an elaborate vegetal border with floral motifs in green and yellow with red-orange accents, defined by bands of gold and red with outermost red and blue fillets ; margin also defined by black fillets ; keywords rubricated ; occasional textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas ; occasional illuminated floral accents set off text arranged on the diagonal ; 29 near full-page and 43 half-page miniatures in the Kashmīrī style, with generous use of lavender, red-orange, orange, yellow, lime green, and slate blue with occasional gold ; a few pencil drawings (see title page, page facing incipit page, etc.).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; bold, elegant Indian hand in a heavy line ; serifless, with marked effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in distinct or conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 11 lines per page, though occasionally four or fewer lines accompanied by a half or near full-page miniature, or three lines accompanied by decorative arrangement of four lines on the diagonal, forming a diamond shape.', 'Collation: Chiefly quaternions in the latter part of the codex, elsewhere gatherings are now altered for interleaving with an extremely haphazard result ; middle of the quire marks in the form of oblique strokes appear in latter gatherings ; catchwords present ; blank leaves interleaved to protect minatures.', 'Explicit: "حيران ماندند و گریبان ها چاك زدند شه تابوت را یكبار بر آوردند فریاد و واویلا از مرد و زن و پیر و جوان ..."', 'Incipit: "بلبل نوایان چمن عشقبازی و دستان سرایان انجمن نکته پردازی طوطی زبان ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant though incomplete copy of what Pasha Mohamad Khan has identified as "Story of the love of Māh-i Munīr son of ‘Arab-Shāh for Khūb-chihrah, merchant’s daughter" (cf. Punjab University Āẕar Collection, MS 16-S-8545G), extensively illustrated with many miniatures (see note on catalog card). Contributions to the transcription also from Pasha Mohamad Khan.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 270', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at close, copied by Fūlād Muḥammad ibn Yār Muḥammad al-Bukhārī with transcription completed in 1006 [1597 or 8].', 'Accompanying materials: Full and half sheets of pastel blue and yellow tipped in to protect painted illuminations and illustrations.', 'Former shelfmark: "155" inscribed in pencil on upper pastedown and recto of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Quite heavy pasteboards (8 mm. thick) now faced in what appears to be dark mahogany-painted / coated paper over red leather with edges / turn-ins in "shagreen" (turquoise in color) and rebacked in dark green coated cloth ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in a light aquamarine wove paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped (with once gold-painted leather onlays) central mandorla, epigraphic pendants with binder\'s signature ("عمل مير محمد يعقوب خواجه"), and bordering lozenges and cornerpieces ; now sewn in heavy white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and light blue, fair condition ; overall in fairly poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of leather and paper, staining, etc. ; seems much repaired.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct) and no chain lines clearly visible, quite sturdy and fairly thick though transluscent, well-burnished.', "Decoration: Exquisite illuminated roundel / shamsah frontispiece on 'title page' carries a patronage statement in white on a central field of gold surrounded by ornamented bands of white, black with delicate floral motifs in white, yellow and red, gold with black crosses and outermost lapis lazuli with arabesques and floral motifs in gold, yellow, white, red, light blue and black and radiating stalks (tīgh) ; superb illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche surrounded by delicate arabesques and floral motifs in white, yellow, red, etc. on grounds of lapis, yelow and black as well as decorative bands in heavy gold interlace, white with black crosses, and black with delicate floral motifs in white, yellow, red, etc., surmounted by scalloped triangular piece or hasp set in heavy band all overlaid with arabesques and floral motifs on fields of gold, black, lapis, red, etc. with vertical stalks (tīgh) above in lapis ; gold vegetal motifs above and in the margin (where they are accented with a crudely applied blue wash) appear to be a later addition ; keywords and headings rubricated, chrysographed or in light blue ; written area surrounded by heavy frame consisting of narrow bands of gold, light blue, dark red / brown and turquoise with outermost black fillets and blue rule ; divisions within written area defined by narrow gold band outlined with black fillets ; extensively illustrated with roughly 68 half to three-quarter page miniatures ; thread tabs marking location of illustrations now covered with paper.", 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; exquisite hand, large though delicate, in a medium line ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 29 lines per page with written area occasionally divided to three columns to set-off poetry ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: v, IV-2 (6), IV-1 (13), 2 IV(29), 2 IV-1(43), IV-4 (47), 3 IV(71), III (77), IV-4 (81), 5 IV(121), III+2 (129), III (135), I+1 (138), v ; chiefly quaternions (several anomalous) ; catchwords present.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads " تمام شد اين شريف كتاب المسمى مجالس العشاق فى شهور سنه ۱۰۰۶ كاتبه فولاد محمد بن يار محمد البخارى غفر لهما"', 'Explicit: "در نهصد و هشت شد روانم خامه در نهصد و نه تمام کشت این نامه م"', 'Incipit: "ای جمیلی که اشعه لمعات حسنت هرجا چراغی بر افروخت ز آتش عشقش خان ..."', 'Title from colophon.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant and extensively illustrated copy of Majālis al-ʻushshāq, a Ṣūfī work on the ecstasy of mystic and material love, compiled at the court of Sulṭān Ḥusayn Bāyqarā (r.1469-1506) at Herat.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 229', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on final panel, executed by Mahmud Celâleddin in 1206 [1791 or 2] and copied from a model executed by Hafız Osman Efendi in 1108 [1696 or 7].', 'Former shelfmark: "99" in pencil on recto of opening panel ; numeral and "T. D. M" [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis] on verso of final panel.', 'Binding: Boards covered (faced) in blue and white marbled paper (kumlu ebru) with red leather over spine and board edges / turn-ins (leather edged framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in same marbled paper ; panels hinged together in same red leather ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Written area on well-burnished paper, pieced, set into frames of marbled paper (ebru) mainly in shades of blue, pink, yellow and black, and mounted on thin boards.', 'Decoration: Illuminated rectangular pieces filled with vegetal decoration in shades of gold, pink, orange, and lavender on fields of blue, gold, etc. flank mid and lower sections of written area on each panel ; written area and divisions within surrounded by frames of gold defined by black fillets ; illuminated textual dividers in the form of gold rosettes with red, orange and blue accents.', 'Script: Exquisite specimen of Ottoman calligraphy ; large lines of each panel (typically opening and closing lines) in thuluth (sülüs), with central lines in naskh (nesih).', 'Layout: Written in 6 to 13 lines per page, including two lines of thuluth with four centered lines of naskh, two lines of thuluth with eight diagonal lines of naskh, one line of thuluth with seven lines of naskh, one line of thuluth with nine diagonal and then three horizontal lines of naskh, etc. ; thuluth and naskh carry separate streams of text.', "Collation: Five 'panels' edged and hinged together with red leather ; numbered in pencil with Hindu-Arabic numerals in the upper outer corner of the written area for each piece ; opens vertically.", 'Colophon: "كتبه من لا قدر له ولا قدر ولا نخل بواديه ولا سدره اضعف العباد الكتاب عثمان المشتهر بحافظ كلام الوهاب شاكرا لله الملك الوهاب ومصليا على نبيه محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين وسلم تسليما كثيرا كثيرا سنة ثمان ومائة والف من هجرة من له العز والشرف ونقلها محمود المعروف بجلال الدين مع الكتبة والتنقيح بعينها غفر الله ذنوبهما ١٢٠٦"', 'Explicit: "نور المسلم من شاب شيبة في الاسلام كتب الله بها حسنة وكفر عنه بها خطيئة ورفعه بها درجة اللهم صل وسلم على اشرف الخلق واكمل الخلق محمد واله الطاهرين اجمعين', 'Incipit: [thuluth] "بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم وبه نستعين وعليه التكلان من الخذلان ..." ; [naskh] "والدباران ياتيها بعد ان تفوته ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Exquisite album of calligraphy (muraqqaʻ / murakkaa) employing ḥadīth of the Prophet executed by the celebrated Ottoman calligrapher Mahmud Celâleddin Efendi (d.1829) in imitation of a model executed by the master calligrapher Hafız Osman Efendi (d.1698).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 245', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.447, copied by Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad al-Kurdī with transcription finished 11 Jumādá I 1152 [ca. 16 August 1739]. As appears in statement to the left of the colophon, collated by ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz al-Raḥbī al-Shāfiʻī with collation completed toward the end of Shawwāl 1152 [January 1740].', 'Former shelfmark: "467 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf (p.2) ; "72" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.3).', "Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures / board linings in block-printed paper with repeating square, cross and floral motifs in green and orange on a yellow and white ground ; upper and lower covers carry 'gold-stamped' (now green) scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal decoration) and pendants, along with tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps outlined by tooled fillets ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and lavender (or gray), good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, minor lifting of leather, etc. ; housed in box for protection.", 'Support: non-European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal and vertical, fairly indistinct), cloudy formation, sturdy , highly sized and burnished, mainly yellow-tinted ; flyleaves in European laid paper (outermost surface-dyed a dark purple) with watermarks of "ALMASSO" and "GM" under shield / arms with eagle above horse.', 'Decoration: Section headings and text of proverbs rubricated ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of a series of a silver band flanked by black and red fillets ; occasional textual divders in the form of hāʼ or three inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine, clear Syrian or Iraqi hand ; mainly serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, mainly curvilinear descenders, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots, elongation of horizontal strokes, partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 35 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 22 V(220), I+1 (223), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "وفرغ منه محمد بن احمد الكردي في يوم الاثنين حادي عشر شهر جمادى الاول سنة اثنين وخمسين ومائة والف حامدا لله ومصليا على نبيه نبي الرحمة م م م"', 'Explicit: "وهي المكافاة ويد سوداء وهي المن وقيل لبعضهم ما العقل قال الاصابة بالظنون ومعرفة ما لم يكن بما قد كان تم الكتاب بتوفيق الله ومنه والحمد لله اولا واخرا وباطنا وظاهرا وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله الاكرمين وسلم تسليما"', 'Incipit: "ان احسن ما يوشح به صدر الكلام واجمل ما يفصل به عقد النظام حمد الله ذي الجلال والاكرام والافضال والانعام ... وبعد فان من المعلوم ان الادب سلم الى معرفة العلوم به يتوصل الى الوقوف عليها ومنه يتوقع الوصول اليها ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of the renowned collection of classical Arabic proverbs compiled by Abū al-Faḍl Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad al-Maydānī (d.1124).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 892', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at close of Majmaʻ al-baḥrayn on p.216, transcription completed 19 Rajab 1137 [ca. 3 April 1725]. Opening work likely completed around the same time.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Part of a page torn from 1908 catalog of Luzac & Co., \'Books on Modern Persian Literature,\' with description of this manuscript "196 KATIBI. Majma ʼal-Bahrain. A Sufic poem. Bound up with "a collection of Masnavis, followed by rubāʻis" by an anonymous writer. Persian MSS. Small 8vo, half-bound. 9s. 1725. Nicely written in red and black ink with illuminated margins." (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Scrap with description of opening work in black ink "Anonymous. A collection of masnavis followed by rubāʻīs. No date XVIII." (paginated pp.3-4) -- c. Scrap with description of second work in black ink "Kātibī. Majmaʻ al-Baḥrain. A Sufic | Dated 1137 A.H. = 1725 A.D." (paginated pp.5-6) -- d. Slip with description in hand of G. Meredith-Owens "MO 10 Majmaʻ al-baḥrain a Ṣūfī poem by Kātibī. Copied 1237 | Preceded by a mas̲navī and some quatrains" (paginated pp.7-8) -- e. Slip with description of second work (in hand of E. Husslman ?) "Muẖammad ibn ʻAbd Allah al-Nīsāpūrī, called Kātibī. Majmaʻ al-bahrain. Not in U. of M. MSS. \'The confluent of the two seas\' ; a Sufī poem which treats of the loves of Nāẓir and Manẓūr. cf. BMCat. Pers. MSS. v.2, p.638a | 100 ff. | 200 pp." (paginated pp.9-10) -- f. Slip with description of opening work (in hand of E. Husslman ?) "Anonymous collection of masnavis and rubais. n.f. anywhere" (paginated pp.11-12) -- g. Slip with note "Counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" (paginated pp.13-14) -- h. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heywood-Dunne?) with Husselman and Meredith-Owen notes" (paginated pp.15-16).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 41', 'Binding: Boards covered in orange-red cloth with brown leather over spine and board corners (half binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted paper ; spine gold-stamped with title "MAJMA | UL | BAHRAEIN" ; possibly now sewn over cords, but also oversewn ; stuck-on endbands in red and white ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion and deterioration of spine leather, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian or Persian) laid paper with roughly 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct, some curving) and no chain lines plainly visible, cloudy formation, thin and transluscent though sturdy, beige to grayish in color, well-burnished ; repairs (fills) in European wove paper ; some pest damage, staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated (mainly in Majmaʻ al-baḥrayn) ; textual dividers in the form of three dots ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of a yellow band defined by black fillets with outermost red rule.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; two elegant hands ; opening through p.100 (selection of poetry) in a clear hand in a medium line, serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, some sweeping descenders, pointing mainly in distinct dots ; p.101 to close (mainly Majmaʻ al-baḥrayn) in a careful hand in a bold line with effect of words descending to baseline, marked contrast in thickness between horizontal and vertical strokes, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing (two and three dots) in conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Written in mainly 12 and 11 lines per page, often divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 5 IV(40), II (44), 7 IV(100), i ; quaternions (as suggested by mid-quire marks, original sewing now obscured) ; middle of the quire marks in the form of oblique black strokes in upper outer corner of right-hand leaf and lower-outer corner of left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: [Majmaʻ al-baḥrayn] "Scribal," rectangular, reads "تمت السراله الموسومه بمجمع البحرين فى التاريخ ۱۹ رجب سنه ۱۱۳۷ كاتب اين صنعت يا لا كلام هست رهى در همه خدمت تمام"', 'Explicit: [Muntakhab-i ashʻār]"در تراصد حکم خاقانی بود اخر کارت چو خاقانی بود در بسازی چون نظامی پنج گنج ربح باشد اخرت زان پنج گنج تم تم تمام شد" ; [Majmaʻ al-baḥrayn] "بیت وی از نام تو معمور باد نامش از انعام تو مشهور باد"', 'Incipit: [Muntakhab-i ashʻār] "ر مر [؟] الان گر کسی فهميد كان الله لم يكن را ديد ..." ; [Majmaʻ al-baḥrayn] "و به الحول و القوة مدام از حضرت مبلغ الهام ... گوید منتظم اين كتاب و متمم اين خطاب ... محمد بن عبد الله نشاپورى المعروف بكاتبى ... مجمع البحرين اشعاريست ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from colophon on p.216.', 'Ms. codex.', '2. p.102-p.216 : Majmaʻ al-baḥrayn / Kātibī.', '1. p.18-p.101 : [Muntakhab-i ashʻār] / Kātibī [?].', 'Fine copy of Majmaʻ al-baḥrayn, an allegorical Ṣūfī poem addressing the loves of Nāẓir and Manẓūr by the Persian poet Kātibī, Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd Allāh (d. ca. 1435-6), preceded by an anonymous selection of poetry (possibly also by Kātibī ?).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 548', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.207, copied by Mehmet bin Mehmet Bey (Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad) with transcription completed 1 Jumādá II 848 [ca. 15 September 1444].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 318" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers bear tooled central binding ornament consisting of a six-pointed star inscribed within a circle (Weisweiler class. W 25-27) with a second six-pointed star inscribed within the outer star, as well as simple cornerpieces and a tooled border in a repeating knot-work stamp flanked by tooled fillets ; sewn in heavy cream thread, two stations ; worked endbands in blue, green and red, significant losses to headband and tailband ; overall in poor condition with flap lost, significant moisture damage, shrinkage, abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather (particularly at board edges), delamination of boards, gatherings detaching from spine, etc. ; repair to spine in brown leather ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines (vertical) possibly grouped in threes with 8-9 mm. between chains and 42-45 mm. between groups (see p.176, etc.) ; quite cloudy formation, laid and chain lines often rather indistinct, thick and sturdy, well-burnished to glossy ; staining, tears, and pest damage.', 'Decoration: Abbreviation symbols and some glosses rubricated ; section headings set off in a large, bold script and occasionally accented with red ink.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Turkish hand in a narrow line ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left (occasionally more exaggerated and accompanied by slight descent of words to the basline), curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct or conjoined dots, and some free-assimilation of letters, partially vocalized, point of final nūn set deep in bowl ; section headings in large, bold, seriffed script reminiscent of tawqīʻ.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V-1 (9), 8 V(89), IV (97), IV-1 (104) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present though nearly cut off or obscured in many places ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes some inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "تمت بعون الله وحسن توفيقه في غرة جمادى الاخر من شهور سنة ثمان واربعين وثمانمائة وتمامه على يد العبد الضعيف المذنب المحتاج الى رحمة اللطيف فانه يعطي الرحمة والمغفرة لمن طلبه حيث قال ادعوني استجب لكم محمد بن محمد بك غفر الله له ولوالديه ... وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل نعم المولى ونعم النصير"', 'Explicit: "ثم قسم الباقي على سهام من بقي منهم وهذا اخر مجمع البحرين وملتقى النيرين ... والله المشكور على افاضة نعمه والمسؤؤل خاتمته السعادة بفضله وكرمه الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على خير البرية محمد واله اجمعين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله جاعل العلماء انجما للاهتداء زاهرة واعلاما للاقتداء طاهرة ... اما بعد فهذا كتاب يصغر للحفاظ حجمه ... يحوي مختصر الشيخ ابي الحسن القدوري ومنضومة [منظومة] الشيخ ابي حفص النسفي رحمهما الله فانهما بحران زاخران وهذا مجمع البحرين وهما النيران المشرقان وهذا ملتقى النيرين احدهما يهدي الى فقه المذهب الذي هو من اشرف المطالب والاخر يعرف الخلاف بين المذاهب ..."', 'Title from closing matter on p.207.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Extensively annotated copy of Muẓaffar al-Dīn Aḥmad ibn ʻAlī Ibn al-Sāʻātī’s compendium on Ḥanafī law, based on the Mukhtaṣar of al-Qudūrī (d.1037) and the Manẓūmah of al-Nasafī (d.1142).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 948', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest transcription in Egypt, late 19th century (or possibly within the first decade of the 20th century).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 97', 'Binding: Boards covered in textured black cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "التوحيد" ; sewn in white thread over three recessed cords, tightly bound ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Machine laid paper and wove paper ; mainly a type with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-28 mm. apart (horizontal) and watermark of words in Arabic script only partially visible (see p.28, 40, 42, etc.) and date (see pp.48 and 60, possibly 1313 [1895 or 6] or 1292 [1876 or 7), light beige in color, virtually unburnished ; another type (see pp.3-6, 13-16) with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (horizontal) and watermark of "GOUVERNEMENT EGYPTIEN" with star and crescent at center and other smaller crescents with three stars (see pp.4, 6, 14, 16 and compare Walz, "The Paper trade of Egypt and the Sudan," p.91), dense and sturdy, beige to buff in color, only lightly burnished ; final leaves of codex (from p.65 to close) are in a wove paper of nearly the same color as the predominant machine laid type.', 'Decoration: Keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of three dots in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; large, clear though somewhat awkward hand in a medium to bold line ; partially but irregularly seriffed with slight right-sloping head-serifs, effect of tilt to the left, some sweeping descenders (often flattened), pointing in distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed though kasrah supplied, fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 15-17 lines per page ; written area often divided to two columns ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board occasionally evident).', 'Collation: i, V-1 (9), 3 V(39), III (45), i ; quinions (one anomalous) followed by a ternion ; final two leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during digitization).', 'Incipit: [Matn Umm al-barāhīn] "الحمد لله والصلاة والسلام على رسول الله اعلم ان الحكم العقلي ينحصر في ثلاثة اقسام الوجوب والاستحالة والجواز ..." ; [Matn al-Jawharah fī al-tawḥīd] "الحمد لله على صلاته ثم سلام الله مع صلاته على نبي جاء بالتوحيد وقد عرى الدين عن التوحيد ..." ; [ Matn Badʼ al-amālī fī al-tawḥīd ] "يقول العبد في بدء الامالي لتوحيد بنظم كاللآلي ..." ; [Matn Alfīyat Ibn Mālik] "قال محمد هو بن مالك احمد الله ربي خير مالك مصليا على الرسول المصطفى واله المستكملين الشرفا ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.22-p.86 : Matn Alfīyat Ibn Mālik / Ibn Mālik.', '3. p.18-p.22 : Matn Badʼ al-amālī fī al-tawḥīd / ʻAlī ibn ʻUthmān al-Ūshī.', '2. p.9-p.18 : Matn al-Jawharah fī al-tawḥīd / Ibrāhīm ibn Ibrāhīm al-Laqānī.', '1. p.1-p.9 : [Matn Umm al-barāhīn fī ʻilm al-kalām] / Muḥammad ibn Yūsuf al-Sanūsī.', 'Fine collection (majmūʻah) of several concise didactic treatises of theology and grammar, mainly in verse, namely Umm al-barāhīn of Abū ʻAbd Allāh Muḥammad ibn Yūsuf al-Sanūsī (d.1490), Jawharat al-tawḥīd of Ibrāhīm ibn Ibrāhīm al-Laqānī (d.1631 or 2), Badʼ al-amālī (or Qaṣīdat yaqūlu al-ʻabd fī Badʼ al-amālī) of ʻAlī ibn ʻUthmān al-Ūshī (12th cent.), and the Alfīyah of Ibn Mālik (d.1274).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 991', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 140', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "مجموعة دعاية للبهاء | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition, though with curvature in boards (negative draw in upper cover, positive draw in lower cover).', 'Support: Machine laid and wove papers of a few types ; following contents listing a machine laid type with watermark of crown / scepter with "BRITISH STANDARD" (see pp.28, 30, etc.) ; another machine laid type with watermark "PAPETERIE DE RENAGE" (see pp.112, 114, 116) ; another type, machine wove with watermark "Alex. Pirie & Sons | EXTRA STRONG" (see p.124, 140).', 'Decoration: Headings and keywords rubricated ; opening contents listing executed entirely in red ink.', 'Script: Naskh with influence of ruqʻah ; modern hand in a narrow line ; mainly serifless with effect of tilt to the left, slight effect of words descending to baseline, curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes or conjoined dots (sometimes oriented vertically), final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 17 lines per page.', "Collation: Pages between sections left blank, some serving as 'title pages' (see pp.103, 149, 173) ; internal pagination (each section) in pencil or ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between pp.7-8).", 'Explicit: "فليس لمعانيها بداية ولا نهاية والروح والبهاء على اهل الهداية والسلام ع ع"', 'Incipit: "هو الله قال الله تعالى حتى اذا بلغ مغرب الشمس وجدها تغرب في عين حمئة الآية يا أيها الناظر الى ملكوت الابهى اعلم بان في هذه الآية المباركة والرنة الملكوتية والنعمة اللاهوتية والحقيقة الروحية لايات المتبصرين وآثارا للشاهدين فانظر الى ان ذلك العالم البصير ..."', 'Title from inscription on p.1.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of a selection of Bahai tracts. Contents listing at opening (see pp.5-10).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 426', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; decoration, etc. of written area suggests 15th century transcription, possibly remounted in the 16th century (as suggested by paper).', 'Former shelfmark: "321 T. De M." [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis] inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "220" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\'.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark maroon leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in seafoam green textured paper (with embossed ridges) ; upper and lower covers carry stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche NSd 7) with gold-painted accents and border ; sewn in bright magenta thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in dark pink and yellow, fair condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, staining, lifting of leather at fore edge flap, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper of two different types ; two columns of written area in a beige to light brown paper mounted on leaves of a creamy, quite sturdy paper with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly distinct) and chain lines grouped in threes (horizontal, curving) with 12-16 mm. between chains and 31-44 mm. between groups, transluscent, crisp, highly sized and burnished.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece at opening consisting of rectangular piece with cartouche (carrying "الحمد لوليه" in white) surrounded by exquisite arabesques in gold and turquoise on a lapis lazuli ground and bordered in bands of gold and white, surmounted by a row of fine arabesques (in gold, white, etc.) on a lapis lazuli ground ; written area (and divisions within) surrounded by a gold frame ; illuminated floral vegetal accents appear often in the free triangular spaces of the written area ; keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of four dots in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Persianate hand in a bold line ; partially but irregularly seriffed, curvilinear descenders, many open counters, fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written area divided to two columns with 6-9 lines per column (mainly a hemistich to a line) often on the diagonal, per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V*(10), VI (22), V (32), I (34), i (*opening two leaves pasted together) ; almost exclusively quinions ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (begins with leaf following incipit page).', 'Explicit: "لعمرك ما شربت الراح جهلا ولكن بالادلة والفتاوي واني مرضت بداءهم فاشربها حلالا للتداوي وصرت موسى زماني مذ صار بعضي كلي انا الكئيب المعني رقوا لحالي وذلي والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لمن عز ومن جل جلالا لا يصلح الا لتعالته تعالى حي ازلي احد ذات قديم رب صمدي سبق الكل كمالا ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant selection of poetry, from the Dīvān attributed to ʻAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib (ca. 600-661), the Dīvān of Ibn al-Fāriḍ (d. 1235), etc.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 365', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; according to inscription on flyleaf, executed by the renowned calligrapher Shāh Maḥmūd Nīshāpūrī whose numerous dated manuscripts and calligraphic specimens fall between roughly 1517 and 1572 ; paper, etc. would also suggest a 16th century date of production, though the manuscript was likely rebound much later.', 'Accompanying materials: Slip of paper with descriptive note in ink in hand of G. Meredith-Owens "365 An anthology of Persian ghazals by Hāfiẓ, Jāmī, ʻĀrifī, Bisāṭī, Bāqī, etc. written in calligraphic Nastaʻlīq on tinted paper. Probably first half of the 17th century. Copied [\'almost certainly,\' struck through] by a Turkish calligrapher. Some leaves missing at the beginning and end."', 'Former shelfmark: "94 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather with red leather over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) in oblong or safīnah format which was perhaps originally intended to be opened vertically ; doublures / board linings in an orange coated, textured (embossed) paper and flyleaves in a shell marbled paper (primarily in black, gray, and dark pink) ; upper and lower covers carry stamped (with gold-painted paper recessed onlays) central lozenge filled with vaguely symmetrical vegetal composition with gold-painted tooled-rosette and stroke accents as well as tooled and gold-painted border ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and dark pink [?], fairly good condition ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper (laid lines fairly indistinct but visible), gold-flecked (margins large grain, written area much finer grain) and tinted various shades of pink and salmon with one leaf in blue, now interleaved with slips of blank, untinted wove paper.', 'Decoration: Written area surrounded by frame consisting of several narrow bands of gold outlined in black fillets with outermost blue fillet, inner perimeter and divisions within defined by narrow gold bands ; headings mainly in white ink ; margins and written area gold-flecked.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; compact, exquisite calligraphic hand in a medium line ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Arranged in 14 hemistiches per page in 10 lines on the diagonal against the long edge of the written area with an additional divided line of four hemistiches along leftward or lower long edge ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V+2 (11), 2 VI(35), VI+1 (48), i ; now chiefly senions / sexternions with blank wove paper interleaved between original leaves ; catchwords present, but leaves do not appear to follow the order prescribed by the catchwords (compare catchword on p.1 and opening of text on p.4) ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (appears in outer margin of each leaf) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Incipit: "حافظ ز دیده دانه اشکی همی فشان ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine collection (majmūʻah) of poetry and exquisite calligraphic specimen, according to inscription on flyleaf executed by the renowned 16th century Ṣafavid calligrapher Shāh Maḥmūd Nīshāpūrī, employing ghazals of ʻĀrifī, Bisāṭī, Jāmī, Ḥāfiẓ, etc.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 349', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; perhaps 17th century [?].', 'Former shelfmark: "515 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" on front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) though not flush with text block (too large) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in textured and coated royal blue paper, foil stamped with a star dot pattern in gold ; upper and lower covers carry gold-tooled borders and corner accents (tooled rosettes with radiating strokes) ; now sewn in yellow thread, four stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and yellow, good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with only minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian or Persian) laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and no chain lines distinctly visible, sturdy, burnished, possibly two thicknesses with written area mounted on another leaf ; extensive pest damage ; numerous repairs (fills).', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece ( ʻunwān / sarlawḥ ) at opening (fol.1b) consisting of rectangular piece with cartouche carrying basmalah surrounded by swirling floral vegetal designs on grounds of gold, light blue, and red, surmounted by a scalloped w-shaped piece filled with similar swirling vegetal motifs on grounds of gold and light blue, all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and set in a well with delicate floral designs on a heavy band of gold flanked by narrower black and gold bands ; written area of incipit and facing page accented with gold cloud-bands and rich marginal decoration of leaves and floral forms in gold outlined in red ; written area surfaced dyed a faint beige and surrounded by frame consisting of heavy gold band defined by black fillets, innermost narrow gold band and outermost red and blue rules ; occasional keywords rubricated ; unfinished miniature (outlines only in ink) near opening (fol.7a) showing figures in a wood on the banks of a stream or river.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand in a medium line ; serifless, with marked effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in distinct dots ; headings in large, bold hand.', 'Layout: Written in 12 lines per page, divided to columns where verses appear ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, IV (8), III (14), IV (22), II (26), IV+1 (35), ii ; chiefly quaternions with a ternion and binion as well ; catchwords present (often obscured by repairs) ; fol.5b left partially blank (perhaps for illustration never realized).', 'Incipit: "بیت الغزل سفینۀ لسان و سر داستان مجموعۀ بیان حمد ... اما بعد بر جوهریان رسته بازار دانش و غواصان بحر ناپیدا کنار بینش روشن و هوید است ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of an anthology of Persian verses with poets typically named in headings.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 884', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; dated seal impression can provide only rough terminus ante quem ; likely late 17th or early 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Card with notes in pencil, "no. 16? generating figures at end | note on this made by E. Savage- Smith" -- b. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) No Husselman or Meredith-Owens notes" -- c. Slip with notes in ink affixed to verso of front flyleaf "14 (16) A Persian Bayaz in prose & verse big thick volume. The list of contents enumerates about 111 names some of which items are very famous & rare. Clear nastalik, red & black ink, binding broken. No date early 18th century. This Bayaz belonged to a nawab Yakub Khan who has made an entry of his illness under the date 1131 A.H. Some of the contents are (1) Risala sihat wa mardh (2) Mathnavi Haji Muhammed Rasai (3) Poems of Ali Razai Tajalli Shirazi (4) complete Rubaiyyat Omar Khayyam (5) Sozogudaz Noi (6) Mahmud ayaz Anis Shamlu (7) Mir Walihi an Aka Beg (8) Rubaiyyat Wahib (9) Poems of Mirza Badia (10) Anji\'s poems (10) Rubaiyyats of Adham (11) of Yahya (12) of Wirki Kummi (13) of Sufi (14) Poems of Abu Turab"', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 33 ; "No (16)" on opening added leaf p.3, etc.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in dark red leather ; sewn in heavy cream thread, two stations, many threads broken leaving loose gatherings ; in quite poor condition with significant shrinkage, cracking and losses of leather in upper and lower covers (now extremely ill-fitting), spine lining fully exposed, cloth hinges damaged, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian or Persian) laid paper, mainly with roughly 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly distinct, slight curving) and occasional chain lines visible, sturdy though thin and transluscent, burnished, some leaves beige or dusky pink in color.', 'Decoration: Headings and keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red hāʼ.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; clear, careful hand in a medium line ; serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Varies widely, though lines typically arranged on the diagonal, in 12-18 lines per page ; often divided to two or three columns to set off poetry.', 'Collation: vi, 3, IV (8), V+1 (19), 2 II (27), 60 IV(507), IV+1 (516), 2 IV(532), III (538), IV (546), III (552), vi ; almost exclusively quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of strokes or cross in red ink, upper outer corner of right-hand leaf, lower-outer corner of left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; some leaves between sections left blank ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and mistakenly skips two pages between pp.773-774).', 'Incipit: "خطبه بیاض من منشآت رموزان دقایق سخندانی نصیرای همدانی بیت المعمور سپاس آلهی ازان با یه برتر است ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of a vast majmūʻah of prose (inshāʼ) and verse, including copies of several letters (maktūb) from Shāh Jahān (r.1628-57), Shāh ʻAbbās II (r.1642–1666), etc., with detailed contents listing added at opening (pp.15-18). Opens with excerpts from the munshiʼāt of Naṣīrā-yi Hamadānī ( خواجه نصیرالدین محمد یزدگری همدانی هندی). Contributions to the cataloguing from Kathryn Babayan and Abdullah Ghouchani.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 648', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon though poem on p.33 possibly dated 1199 [1784 or 5]. Paper, etc. suggests late 18th or early 19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, \'title page\' (p.5) and label on lower cover, "IL 128" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red cut velvet with dark red leather over spine and edges/turn-ins (framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in marbled paper (striking pattern mainly in red, blue, yellow and black on white) with doublure hinges in a different marbled paper (blue on white) ; leather surrounding velvet panels gold-tooled in wide guilloché roll border ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations, though textblock detached from cover and with many loose quires ; overall in somewhat poor condition with some abrasion and staining, lifting of leather, spine fully split with covers detached from one another and from textblock, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (vertical or horizontal, varies), curved and fairly distinct and occasional chain lines visible at roughly 45 mm. apart ; thin and crisp though sturdy, well-burnished to glossy ; alternating leaves surface dyed a dark yellow ochre, pale green or pale pink.', 'Decoration: Occasional vocalization and orthographic signs rubricated ; signatures following several of the poems rubricated ; for one poem (see p.22) opening letters of opening words of each hemistich rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; compact, elegant hand ; characteristically serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and thickness of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 29 lines per page ; often divided to two columns to set off poetry.', 'Collation: 2 V (20), I+2 (24) ; possible that leaves are missing ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '16. p.50-p.52 : [blank].', '15. p.47-p.49 : [three short poems in Turkish].', '14. 46-p.47 : [mainly poems, opens "تجلى ضيا الفضل من افقك الاعلا" ].', '13. p.38-p.45 : [blank].', '12. p.35-37 : [short prose piece, opens "الحمد لله ... يا مخلص النفوس اذا لعثمت دياجي"].', '11. p.34-p.35 : [poem, opens "بك المناصب في العلياء تفتخر" ].', '10. p.32-p.33 : [poem, opens "لحى الله دهرا بالاحبة افجعا" ].', '9. p.29-p.31 : [short prose piece, opens "الحمد لله وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد ... انظر روض باكرة الماطر" ].', '8. p.28 : [short prose piece, opens "بسم الله الجامع بذاته حقائق اسمائه وصفاته" ].', '7. p.26-p.27 : [short prose piece, opens "ما تبسم فجر وضحك غمام" ].', '6. p.25 : [poem signed al-Sayyid Muḥammad, opens "تبسم ثغر الفتح يهتف بالنصر" ].', '5. p.20-p.24 : [poems]', '4. p.19-p.20 : [poem signed ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz al-Ṣamadī [?], opens "يا شام كم لك من يد عندي" ].', '3. p.13-p.18 : [poems, final signed ʻUmar ibn ʻAbd al-Salām, opens "الحمد لله ... قم يا نديم فما اصطباحك عار" ].', '2. p.9-p.12 : [poem signed Muḥammad Najīb al-Azharī al-Ḥusnī al-ʻAṭṭār, opens "جاءت وكف القبول يحملها"].', '1. p.6-p.8 : [poem signed Muḥammad Ṣādiq, opens "حتى متى البين ومر السهاد اقضى ولا اقضى بسعدي مراد"].', 'Fine copy of a small collection of poems and brief prose pieces in Arabic (some signed by Muḥammad Ṣādiq, Muḥammad Najīb al-Azharī al-Ḥusnī al-ʻAṭṭār, ʻUmar ibn ʻAbd al-Salām, and ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz al-Ṣamadī [?]), concluding with three short poems in Turkish.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 477', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.120, transcription completed 25 Rabīʻ I 1237 [ca. 20 December 1821].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 20" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in block-printed textile (yellow on white) with red leather over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted wove paper ; resewn in white thread over cords, six stations plus primaries ; worked chevron endbands in green-blue and orange-red, good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with staining, some abrasion and lifting of leather, etc.', "Support: European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 32 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark (100 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p. 102, 103, etc.) ; crisp and sturdy ; well-burnished with burnisher's marks visible ; much staining.", 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and some abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red hāʼ.', 'Script: Naskh ; at least three Turkish hands ; all at least partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs, effect of tilt to the left, and curvilinear descenders ; opening hand (to p.44) freely ligatured ; medial hand (pp.45-74) showing some contrast in thickness between horizontal and vertical strokes ; final hand (from p.74) compact, quite rounded and exhibiting slight effect of words descending to baseline.', 'Layout: Written in 16-19 lines per page.', 'Collation: 2 V(20), 2 IV(36), 2 V(56), I+2 (60), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "والفراغ عن هذه النسخة المباركة يوم الثلاثة خمسة والعشرين من شهر الربيع الاول سنت الف ومائتين سبعة وثلاثين عفا الله عمن كتبها او قرأها امين م م م م م م م م م م"', 'Explicit: "وهذا هو الشائع يومئذ في البلاد وهو مستحب عند ذوي الارشاد والسداد والله اعلم هذا اخر الالف المألوف في كشف الحروف لجن على يد مؤلفه ومن اعتني بجمعه الراجي رحمة ربه الغفور ابو الفتح بن صدقة منصر [بن منصور ؟] السرميني ... والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي اعز بكتابه العزيز من كان ذليلا ... فقد استخرت الله الكريم الفتاح العليم في جمع اوراق اذكر فيها القراء السبعة الذين الختار الامام ابو بكر بن مجاهد ونحوه من المشايخ قرآاتهم وهو اول من صنف في القراءة السبع ... وسميت ذلك الالف المألوف في فرش الحروف ..."', 'Title from close on p.119.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of a treatise attributed to Abū al-Fatḥ [ʻAlī] ibn Ṣadaqah ibn Manṣūr al-Sarmīnī (fl. 1340) on Qurʼānic readings, specifically the seven readings collected by Ibn Mujāhid.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 236', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon, but at the close includes four statements each attesting to its authenticity as a specimen in the hand of 'the late shaykh,' likely Şeyh Hamdullah of Amasya (d.1519 or 20). Signators of the statements include Eğrikapılı Mehmet Râsim Efendi (d.1756), renowned student of Seyyid Abdullah of Yedikule (d.1731), accompanied by his seal ; Seyyid Abdullah's son and student Emirefendizade Seyyid Abdülhalim (d.1759), accompanied by his seal dated 1135 [1722 or 3] ; likely Yahya Fahrettin (d.1756), student of İkinci Derviş Ali (d.1716) ; and possibly Yahya b. İsmail (Kirişci) (d.1759). Thus the calligraphy would have been executed in the early 16th century (if not late 15th century), and signatures, initial piecing, etc. in the first half of the 18th century. Mounting possibly later.", 'Former shelfmark: "553 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on interior of lower cover.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in light brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in magenta-tinted, gold-flecked paper ; upper and lower covers carry tooled and gold-painted frames each consisting of a guilloché roll flanked by gold fillets ; panels hinged together with green silk (possibly once in accordion format) ; overall in good condition with only minor abrasion.', 'Support: Written area on well worn leaves, pieced, set into an elaborate frame in several different laid papers (pink-tinted, yellow-tinted, magenta-tinted and gold-flecked, and blue-tinted and gold-flecked, though colors of facing panels match), and mounted on other leaves of gold-flecked, magenta-tinted, European laid paper with watermarks of "F C" under three stars and three hats.', 'Decoration: Illuminated floral vegetal pieces appear in panels flanking the written area on each of the first four pages, consisting of a central floral piece filled with a vegetal decoration in gold, pink, red, white, and blue continued as cornerpieces on a blue ground ; each of these decorative panels is surrounded by an elaborate frame in pink, gold interlace, and blue ; decoration of final page forms an elegant illuminated tailpiece continuing the vegetal pattern in pink, red, orange, white, and green on fields of blue and gold and accommodating the close of the text as well as the four statements of authenticity ; textual dividers in the form of illuminated rosettes with blue, red and white accents appear throughout.', 'Script: Fine specimen of Ottoman calligraphy ; an elegant naskh, partially seriffed, with very slight tilt to the left and some sweeping descenders.', 'Layout: Written in 12-15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', "Collation: Six 'panels' (mounted leaves) hinged together with silk ; all originally joined back to back at both edges, now only at one edge except for two of the six ; opens vertically.", 'Explicit: "اللهم انصر من نصر الدين واخذل من خذل المسلمين امين يا رب العالمين برحمتك يا ارحم الراحمين"', 'Incipit: "صدق الله العظيم وبلغ رسوله الكريم ونحن على ما قال ربنا وخالقنا ورازقنا مولينا من الشاهدين اللهم ربنا تقبل منا ختم القرآن ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Exquisite album of calligraphy (muraqqaʻ or murakkaa) employing a prayer text (duʻāʼ), likely executed by the master Ottoman calligrapher, Şeyh Hamdullah of Amasya (d.1520).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 946', 'Origin: As appears in colophons on p.19 and p.29, second and third works copied by ʻAbd al-Raḥmān Muḥammad al-Dahhān with transcription of third work completed 11 Dhū al-Qaʻdah 1214 [ca. 6 April 1800]. Transcription of opening work likely circa 1800, perhaps early 19th or even late 18th century (as suggested by paper and hand). Transcription of final work likely late 19th century (as suggested by paper and hand).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 95', 'Binding: Boards covered in black textured cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pale pink and green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "مجموعة | سؤال الزرقاني" ; sewn in white thread, six stations, tightly bound ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion and pest damage.', 'Support: European laid paper of three types, each section of the composite volume in a distinct type ; opening section (binion carrying first work) in a type with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-28 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of three crescents with faces in profile (perpendicular to chains, roughly 73 mm. long, see pp.2 and 8) and scrollwork / arms with double-headed eagle (see pp.4 and 6), sturdy, well-burnished, cream in color ; second section (senion carrying second and third works) in a type with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced roughly 36-40 mm. apart (horizontal, somewhat faint), and watermark of three crescents (perpendicular to chains, 90 mm. long, see pp.12, 14, etc.), quite sturdy, lightly burnished, beige in color ; final section (quaternion carrying fourth work) a type with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 24-25 mm. apart (vertical) and watermark of crescent with face in shield (see p.36, 40, etc.) and "Carbera De Mori | Vittorio" in script (see pp.34, 38, 44, 48 and compare Isl. Ms. 726 copied 1894), sturdy, burnished, bright cream in color.', 'Decoration: Keywords and headings rubricated in all three sections ; overlining in red (mainly opening section but also occasionally in second section) ; textual dividers in the form of red discs, single and three dots (mainly second section).', 'Script: Naskh ; three main hands ; opening work in a clear Egyptian or Syrian hand in a medium line, compactly filling the line and seriffed (irregularly) with right-sloping head-serifs on most ascenders and shaqq of kāf, slight effect of words descending toward the baseline, occasional inclination to the right or left, quite rounded though descenders more rectilinear, pointing in distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ, kāf mashqūqah / mashkūlah preferred with shaqq appearing on even final kāf ; second and third works in a clear, small Syrian or Egyptian hand in a medium line, mainly serifless (though with odd serifs occasionally appearing) with slight effect of words descending to baseline, curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in distinct dots though three dots usually represented by a curved stroke and two dots occasionally represented by a single stroke, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ, kāf mashqūqah / mashkūlah preferred with long straight shaqq appearing on even final kāf ; final work in a clear, Ottoman naskh in a thin line, partially but somewhat irregularly seriffed with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline, curvilinear descenders, some free assimilation of letters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 25, 23, and 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, II (4), VI (16), IV (24), i ; binion, senion and quaternion, each corresponding to a distinct section of the composite volume with distinct moment of transcription, opening ternion trimmed smaller than the other two gatherings ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: [Natījat afkār dhawī al-majd] "Scribal," triangular, reads "وكان الفراغ من تعليق هذه النسخة العظيمة الشريفة من نسخة نقلت من نسخة نقلت من نسخة مؤلفه شيخنا ... شمس الدين الزهار العزيزي الشافعي رحمه الله تعالى على يد الفقير الحقير المعترف بالذنب والتقصير من يرجوا [كذا] عفو ربه المنان عبد الرحمن محمد الدهان الشافعي غفر الله له ولوالديه ولجميع المسلمين اجمعين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم" ; [Risālat ayy al-mushaddadah] "Scribal," triangular, reads "وكانت الكتابة من نسخ الرسالة العظيمة للشيخ الامام العارف بالله تعالى الشيخ عثمان ابن احمد النجدي ... في احدى عشر خلت من ذي القعدة سنة اربعة عشر ومائتين والف على يد الفقير عبد الرحمن الدهان الشافعي عفي عنه امين امين امين ... والحمد لله رب العالمين وهو حسبي ونعم الوكيل تم تم تم تم تم تم تم"', 'Incipit: [Suʼāl fī al-farāgh ʻan al-ṭīn al-sulṭānī ] "الحمد لله رب العالمين ... وبعد فيقول الفقير علي الصعيدي العدوي خادم الفقراء بالازهر وقعت نازلة في الطلاق فيما يتعلق بالبساط فوقع الافتاء بها بعدم الطلاق قياسا على مسئلة ذكرها الشيخ عبد الباقي في شرحه الصغير ... سؤال رفع للعلامة الشيخ عبد الباقي الزرقاني رحمه الله تعالى في الفراغ عن الطين السلطاني وهو ما تقول علما الاسلام متع الله تعالى بوجودهم ..." ; [Natījat afkār dhawī al-majd] "الحمد لله الذي له الامر من قبل ومن بعد ... وبعد فقد سألني اعز اخواني واوحد خلاني ... ان اضع له رسالة لطيفة تتضمن ابحاث وبعد فاجبته الى ذلك راجيا من القادر المالك ان يهديني الى احسن المسالك وسميتها نتيجة افكار ذوي المجد في تحرير ابحاث وبعد ..." ; [Risālat ayy al-mushaddadah] "وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد ... الحمد لله رافع المشكلات عن اولى الالباب وناصب العلامات على ذلك من سنة ...وبعد فيقول الفقير الى رحمة ربه العلي عثمان بن احمد النجدي الحنبلي ... هذه فوائد تتعلق بأي المشددة ..." ; [Sharḥ Qaṣīdat Ilzam bāb Rabbik] "الحمد لله الذي علم الاشياء قبل وجود وجعل لكل شيء قدرا ... اما بعد فهذا قدر قليل في شرح قصيدة من اسمه مذكور في قوله تعالى لما قام عبد الله يدعوه ... قال رضي الله عنه الزم باب ربك اي الزم يا ايها العبد المخلوق ..."', 'Title from inscription on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '6. p.33-p.48 : Hādhihi al-qaṣīdah li-quṭb zamānih wa-farīd ʻaṣrih wa-aqrānih al-sayyid ʻAbd Allāh ibn ʻAlawī al-Ḥaddād Bāʻalawī wa-al-Sharḥ li-mawlānā al-ʻallāmah al-shaykh Muḥammad Ḥayāt al-Sindī [aw Sharḥ Qaṣīdat Ilzam bāb Rabbik] / ʻAbd Allāh ibn ʻAlawī al-Ḥaddād Bāʻalawī ; Muḥammad Ḥayāt al-Sindī.', '5. p.30-p.32 : [blank].', '4. p.21-p.29 : Hādhihi fawāʼid tataʻallaqu bi-ayy al-mushaddadah [aw Risālat ayy al-mushaddadah] / ʻUthmān ibn Aḥmad al-Najdī.', '3. p.20 : [excerpt from the decisions of Shaykh Shams al-Dīn al-Zahhār al-ʻAzīzī al-Shāfiʻī].', '2. p.9-p.19 : Kitāb Natījat afkār dhawī al-majd fī taḥrīr abḥāth wa-baʻd / Shams al-Dīn al-Zahhār al-ʻAzīzī al-Shāfiʻī.', '1. p.1-p.8 : Hādhā Suʼāl rufiʻa lil-ʻallāmah al-shaykh ʻAbd al-Bāqī al-Zurqānī fī al-farāgh ʻan al-ṭīn al-sulṭānī wa-jawābuh li-jamʻ min al-aʼimmah / ʻAbd al-Bāqī al-Zurqānī ; ʻAlī ibn Aḥmad al-Ṣaʻīdī al-ʻAdawī.', 'Fine composite collection (majmūʻah) of four works on topics of fiqh, grammar and Ṣūfistic poetry, namely a commentary on a poem of ʻAbd Allāh ibn ʻAlawī al-Ḥaddād (d.1720).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 945', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon, though a birth notice for Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Zayn al-ʻĀbidīn al-Ghazzī al-ʻĀmirī (احمد بن محمد بن زين العابدين الغزي العامري) dated 24 Ramaḍān 1158 [October 1745] in Damascus as well as accompanying poetic excerpts (on the occasion of his birth) appears at close on pp.298-99 in what appears to be the second copyist's hand. Paper, hand, etc. certainly suggest a mid-18th century dating.", 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 94', 'Binding: Boards covered in black cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "مجموعة ادب" ; now stab sewn in white thread ; stuck-on endbands in maroon cloth ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: European laid paper ; mainly with 12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of grapes under crown and cartouche with heart and initials (see p.14, 20, 68, 106, 298), sturdy, well-burnished to glossy, dark cream to buff in color ; final leaf (perhaps originally served as flyleaf) in type with three crescent watermark (see p.304).', 'Script: Naskh ; at least two, clear though somewhat awkward Syrian hands ; opening hand serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, mainly open counters, pointing in distinct dots ; elsewhere a more angular hand with dramatic inclination to the right, more rectilinear descenders, still mainly serifless.', 'Layout: Highly varies, though roughly 12-21 lines per page, divided to two columns.', 'Collation: Gatherings virtually impossible to examine due to tight sewing ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf and skips two pages between pp.11-12).', 'Title from inscription on verso of front flyleaf (p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of a vast collection (majmūʻah) of assorted poems, including qaṣāʼid, muwashshaḥāt, etc. by various authors, most identified.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 161', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests very late 18th or early 19th century. Scrap paginated pp.159-160 appears to be dated "٢١ تموز ٩٨".', 'Accompanying materials: Scrap with notes and figures (paginated pp.159-160) and scrap bearing list of names (paginated pp.195-196).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 75. Prayers & dicta." ; "٢۷٤" on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered black leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in green surface-tinted wove paper ; sewn in black thread, two stations ; in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, moisture damage, negative draw in covers and flap, some spine slant (slightly cocked), etc.', 'Support: European wove paper (mainly), quite smooth and burnished ; a few of the opening quires in European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 20 mm. apart (vertical), and watermarks including eagle, crown, name, etc.', 'Decoration: Titles, section headings, keywords and abbreviation symbols rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand ; right-sloping head serif appears occasionally on lām of definite article, etc. ; very slight effect of tilt to the left ; curvilinear descenders ; sweeping tail on final nūn ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, I (2), 9 V(92), IV (100), i ; chiefly quinions ; occasional leaves between works left blank (see pp.5-6, pp.25-27, pp.67, pp.162-169, pp.198-200) ; catchwords present ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and inserts ; skips two pages each between pp.175-176 and pp.199-200).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of a collection (majmūʻah / mecmua) of prayers, with detailed contents listing at opening (pp.3-4) corresponding to pagination in Hindu-Arabic numerals.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 48', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests 19th century.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 36. Collection of prayers." ; "۲۷۱" on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in a lime green surface-tinted wove paper ; upper and lower covers bear gold-stamped central panel, cornerpieces, and border (mainly rosettes and leaves) ; sewn in black thread (inserted quinion and ternion sewn in white thread), two stations ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, negative draw in upper cover and flap, etc.', 'Support: European wove paper ; thin (though sturdy) and well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Titles, section headings, keywords, abbreivation symbols and some marginalia (mainly notabilia/side-heads) rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand ; partially seriffed with right-sloping head serifs on lām of definite article, etc. ; effect of slight tilt to the left ; pointing in distinct dots ; mainly open counters ; graceful curvilinear descenders ; fully vocalized ; text on inserted quinion and ternion (in quire 5, pp.99-130) supplied in a different hand.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 9, 11, and 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, II (4), 2 VIII (36), IV (44), V+V+III (70), 2 V(90), IV (98), VI (110), 4 V(150), i ; quinion and ternion inserted in fifth quire ; final two leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of a collection (majmūʻah / mecmua) of assorted prayers, invocations and verses (including aḥzāb, awrād, adʻiyah, munājāt and qaṣāʼid) with detailed contents listing at opening (pp.4-7) corresponding to pagination in Hindu-Arabic numerals.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 46', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 96. Prayers & tracts." ; "۲۷٦" on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in olive-tinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers bear border in gold, textured onlays ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and cream, fair condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of leather (at spine), etc.', 'Support: European laid paper and non-European (Persian) laid paper ; European laid paper mainly with 13 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 20-21 mm. apart, and watermark with three hats in scrollwork/coat of arms ; non-European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, some curving), no chain lines, fairly transluscent.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece at opening of Ḥadīqat al-udabāʼ (p.96) consisting of rectangular piece (with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral design in gold, white, pink and orange on fields of red and blue) surmounted by w-shaped piece with swirling floral design in pink, white, blue, gold and orange on fields of blue, orange and pink, set in a well of pink and red, all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; textual dividers in the form of illuminated rosettes with blue and orange accents ; written area throughout surrounded by frame consisting of gold band outlined by black fillets ; titles, section headings, numerals and abbreviation symbols often rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant, graceful Ottoman hand ; right-sloping head serifs ; effect of tilt to the left ; pointed in distinct dots ; mainly open counters ; descenders mainly curvilinear ; tapered rightward descenders ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, VI+1 (13), III (19), V (29), IV (37), IV+2 (47), 3 V(77), IV (85), II-1 (88), i ; catchwords present ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of a collection (majmūʻah / mecmua) of prayers and short religious treatises, with detailed contents listing at opening (p.1).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 160', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.156, transcription of litany completed in the year 1129 [1716 or 17].', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 89. Portions of Kuran and prayers."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in European laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (compare Déroche class. OAi), pendants and cornerpieces ; sewn in grey thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in light-blue and cream, fair condition ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, some lifting of leather, delamination of boards, staining, negative draw in upper cover, etc.', "Support: European laid paper of at least three types ; mainly with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 19 mm. apart (horizontal), watermark with crown above bar carrying initials, well-burnished, thin and transluscent though sturdy ; another type appears in opening and latter quires with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), three crescent watermark, quite thick and sturdy ; final quire in a thin, very well-burnished (glossy) paper with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain line spaced 22 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark consisting of three circles topped by crown with crescent above six-pointed star in the top circle and 'C' and the bottom circle.", 'Decoration: Headings and abbreviation sybmols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh ; mainly an Elegant Turkish hand, virtually serifless with mainly open counters and very slight effect of tilt to the left, fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 9 and 7 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: III (6), II (10), V (20), IV (28), 4 V(68), IV (76), V (86), VIII (102) ; final quire left blank ; middle of the quire marks in the form of red circles (resembling hāʼ or numeral khamsah ٥) appear in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips from p.55 to p.60).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '13. p. p.177-p.208 : [mainly blank with a few prayer excerpts and notes].', '12. p.173-p.176 : [assorted other prayers].', '11. p.172 : Bab-ı taun için günde on iki kere.', '10. p.167-p.171 : Dua-yı taun için ve gayr-ı marazlar için.', '9. p.158-p.166 : Salavat-ı şerif.', '8. p.157 : [blank].', '7. p.70-p.156 : Awrād Shaykh Pīr Muḥammad Bahāʼī / Bahaüddin Nakşibend.', '6. p.62-p.156 : [prayer litany concluding with the well-known prayers ascribed to Bahaüddin Nakşibend].', '5. p.60 [sic]-p.61 : [originally left blank, now carries prayer excerpts in Ottoman Turkish].', '4. p.40-p.55 : Sūrat al-Fatḥ.', '3. p.24-p.39 : Sūrat Yāsīn.', "2. p.12-p.23 : [originally left blank, now carries some excerpts, owners' marks, etc.].", '1. p.2-p.11 : [Daʻwat al-Juljulūtīyah, incomplete, with elucidation in Ottoman Turkish] / [Aḥmad ibn ʻAlī al-Būnī].', 'Fine copy of a collective prayerbook (in the manner of a majmūʻah) containing selections from the Qurʼān (namely Sūrat Yāsīn and Sūrat al-Fatḥ) and assorted prayers, including the well known litany ascribed to Bahaüddin Nakşibend (d.1389), a prayer against plague and other diseases, etc. On added leaves at opening, Daʻwat al-Juljulūtīyah, attributed to al-Būnī.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 47', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests 19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Two scraps of paper with notes (paginated pp.177-178 and pp.199-200).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 7. Aurad wa-ahzab." ; "۲۷۳" on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in a green surface-tinted wove paper ; upper and lower covers bear gold-stamped central panel, cornerpieces, and border (mainly rosettes and leaves) ; sewn in black thread, two and four stations, loose in some places ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, label affixed to upper cover, textblock detaching from spine, some negative draw in upper cover and flap, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper mainly with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (vertical), and watermarks including eagle (wings spread), lion rampant in shield with crown above ; some quires in European wove paper ; all thin (though sturdy) and well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords in some sections rubricated ; elsewhere occasional abbreivation symbols and marginalia (mainly notabilia/side-heads) rubricated ; appears that in some sections lacunae were left for textual dividers or rubricated keywords, headings, etc.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand ; right-sloping head serifs ; effect of slight tilt to the left ; pointing in distinct dots ; mainly open counters ; graceful curvilinear descenders ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 13, 15 and 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, II (4), VI (16), V (26), I (28), IV (36), XI (58), V (68), IV (76), 2 III (88), I (90), IV+2 (100), III (106), VIII (122), I (124), i ; catchwords present ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and inserts).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of a prayer collection (majmūʻah / mecmua) of litanies and invocations with detailed contents listing at opening (pp.4-7) corresponding to pagination in Hindu-Arabic numerals.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 156', "Origin: According to colophon on fol.29b, the collection of al-Nābulusī's treatises was copied by al-Sayyid Muṣṭafá al-Ṣamūnī [?]. Copying for the first treatise completed 1185 [1771 or 1772]. No other scribal colophon appears in the collection, though several authorial colophons were copied with their respective treatises and include dates of composition. The colophon accompanying the inserted section (excerpt from al-Futūḥāt al-Makkīyah) is anonymous but indicates that copying was finished 29 Ramaḍān 951 [ca. 14 December 1544].", 'Accompanying materials: a. envelope with inscription inserted between fol.35-36 -- b. folded document dated 1279 Hijrī, written in a Turkish hand and referring to Erzurum inserted between fol.134-135 -- b. blank envelope inserted between fol.160-161.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 38. Legal & religious writings of Abd al-Ghani al-Nablusi, & Futuhat al-Makkiyah."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather; Type II binding (with flap); board linings in untinted European laid paper with three crescents (tre lune) watermark (see lower board lining); upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped central mandorla (NSd7 Déroche class.), as well as blind-tooled borders and corners; envelope flap carries mandorla, interior of flap is trimmed in an interesting pattern to reveal the turn-in; sewn in rose and pink thread, two stations; worked chevron endbands in white; in good condition.', 'Support: Mainly European laid paper of several types; opening type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines 25-26 mm. apart (horizontal), watermark of shield / arms with snake [?], crown above and heart below (see p.4, 18, 34, 316, 454, 552, etc.), and countermark of "V L" (see p.12, 32, 336, 602, etc.); inserted section on different European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-28 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of anchor in circle (see p.162, 168, etc.);', 'Decoration: Figures drawn to accompany the text appear on fol.117a (on divine revelation) and fol.305a (elucidating the azimuth of the qiblah).', 'Script: Naskh; entire collection of treatises in roughly the same Turkish hand; text of al-Futūḥāt al-Makkīyah excerpt in older Syrian (?) hand.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page; frame-ruled (impression of ruling-board/misṭarah evident).', 'Collation: i, II(4), 2 V (24), IV-2 (30), V (40), VI (52), V (62), VI (74), I+1 (77), 3 V (107), VI-1 (118), IV (126), VII (140), IV (148), III+1 (155), VI (167), V (177), IV+1 (186), 5 V (236), II+1 (241), I (243), 2 V (263), I (265), V (275), V-1 (284), IV (292), VI (304), I (306), i; catchwords present; foliation in ink faded to gray, Hindu-Arabic numerals, begins after incipit page and accounts for inserted section (fol.78a-107b in system of Western pagination) which carries its own foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals; pagination added later in pencil, Western numerals; lacunae of fol.240b-241a marked "صحيح".', 'Explicit: "ميل السطح والارتفاع والسموت الافقية والانحرافية اشكار انتهى"', 'Incipit: "الحمدلله الوجود الحق المبين المضاف عند العقول الى كل شيء بمتضى حكمه المتين... اما بعد فيقول شيخنا واستاذنا وبركتنا وملاذنا الامام العالم العلامة...سيدي الشيخ عبد الغني الشهير بابن النابلسي...هذا شرح لطيف العبارة وظاهر الاشارة وضعته على الرسالة التي صنفها الشيخ الامام...محمد بن الشيخ فضل الله الهندي..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '27. fol. 305b-306a : Hādhihi Risālat al-inḥirāf.', '26. fol. 304b-305a : "Fī maʻrifat samt al-qiblah..."', '25. fol. 303b-304a : [blank].', '24. fol. 285a-303a : Kitāb Tawfīq al-rutbah fī taḥqīq al-khuṭbah / ʻAbd al-Ghanī ibn Ismāʻīl al-Nābulusī.', '23. fol. 279a-284b : Kitāb Radd al-jāhil ilá al-ṣawāb fī jawāz iḍāfat al-taʼthīr ilá al-asbāb / ʻAbd al-Ghanī ibn Ismāʻīl al-Nābulusī.', '22. fol. 278b : [blank].', '21. fol. 273a-278a : Basṭ al-dhirāʻayn bi-al-waṣīd fī bayān al-ḥaqīqah wa-al-majāz fī al-tawḥīd / ʻAbd al-Ghanī ibn Ismāʻīl al-Nābulusī.', '20. fol. 272b : [blank].', '19. fol. 266a-fol.272a : Risālat al-baytayn / ʻAbd al-Ghanī ibn Ismāʻīl al-Nābulusī.', '18. fol. 265b : [blank].', '17. fol. 234a-265a : Risālat al-Mawāhib al-mustarsalah ʻalá al-Tuḥfah al-mursalah / ʻAbd al-Ghanī ibn Ismāʻīl al-Nābulusī.', '16. fol. 233b : [blank].', '15. fol. 173a-233a : Risālat Khamrat al-ḥān wa-rannat al-alḥān fī sharḥ risālat al-Shaykh Arslān / ʻAbd al-Ghanī ibn Ismāʻīl al-Nābulusī.', '14. fol. 171b-172b : [blank].', '13. fol. 150a-171a : Nafkhat al-ṣūr wa-nafkhat al-zuhūr sharḥ abyāt qabḍat al-nūr / ʻAbd al-Ghanī ibn Ismāʻīl al-Nābulusī.', '12. fol. 149a-149b : [blank].', '11. fol. 139b-148b : Risālat al-fatḥ al-ṭarī al-janī fī maʼāthir al-Shaykh ʻAbd al-Ghanī.', '10. fol. 138b-139a : [blank].', '9. fol. 116b-138a : Risālat Sharḥ al-Tajallīyāt lil-Shaykh al-Akbar / [ʻAbd al-Ghanī ibn Ismāʻīl al-Nābulusī?].', '8. fol. 116a : [blank].', '7. fol. 108b-115b : Sharḥ Awrād al-bahāʼ lil-Adhnawī [?] / [ʻAbd al-Ghanī ibn Ismāʻīl al-Nābulusī?].', '6. fol. 108a : [blank].', '5. fol. 78a-107b : [Excerpts from al-Futūḥāt al-Makkīyah] / Muḥyī al-Dīn Ibn al-ʻArabī.', '4. fol. 77b : [blank].', '3. fol. 31a-77a : Miftāḥ al-Futūḥ / ʻAbd al-Ghanī ibn Ismāʻīl al-Nābulusī.', '2. fol. 30a-30b : [blank].', '1. fol. 2a-29b : Sharḥ al-Tuḥfah al-mursalah / ʻAbd al-Ghanī ibn Ismāʻīl al-Nābulusī.', "A collection (majmūʻah / mecmua) of treatises by ʻAbd al-Ghanī al-Nābulusī with a much older copy of an excerpt from Ibn al-ʻArabī's al-Futūḥāt al-Makkīyah bound in."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 931', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 80', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "مجموعة رسائل ملا صدرا | محمد بن ابراهيم | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; compact hand in a medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with slight effect of tilt to the right, mainly closed counters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 26 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 14 IV(112), i ; exclusively quaternions ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals with letter ك on opening recto of each quire ; calculations by the copyist to determine page count by multiplying number of pages in each quire blank (16) by number of quires seen at close or opening of a few quires (see pp.192, 193, 209, etc.) ; blank leaf inserted between page ١٥٢ and page ١٥٣ ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', '5. p.59-p.224 : Shadharāt ṣāliḥah min Kitāb ʻIlm al-yaqīn / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Shīrāzī.', '4. p.36-p.59 : Sharḥ Risālat al-Mawlá Arslān fī ḥaqīqat al-tawḥīd / Arslān ibn Yaʻqūb al-Jaʻbarī.', '3. p.25-p.35 : al-Risālah al-thālithah al-Ṣadrīyah fī ajwibat Mullā Ṣadrā ʻan masāʼil al-Shams al-Jīlānī.', '2. p.12-p.24 : al-Risālah al-thānīyah min rasāʼil al-Ṣadr fī jawābih ʻan masāʼil Naṣīr al-Dīn al-Ṭūṣī / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Shīrāzī.', '1. p.1-p.12 : al-Risālah al-ūlá fī Sirr al-nuqṭah / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Shīrāzī.', 'Careful copy of a collection (majmūʻah / mecmua) of works by Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī (d.1641), renowned philosopher of the Ṣafavid period.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 152', 'Origin: Only a few texts are dated, ranging from 8th of Rajab 995 / ca. 14 June 1587 [1-4?] to Dhū al-Qaʻdah 1000 / Aug. 1592 [5]. Paper suggests similar dating for transcription of final works.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 44 Tracts on Traditions, etc."', 'Binding: Composite cover with upper and lower boards mismatched; pasteboards covered in light brown (upper cover) and dark red-brown leathers (lower cover and envelope flap, likely replacements) with still another light brown leather over spine, fore edge flap and board edges of lower cover (perhaps to conceal a trim to fit this text block) as well as used for hinges ; Type II binding (with flap); board lining of upper cover in now pale blue laid paper, board lining of lower cover (and interior of envelope flap) in marbled paper (mainly in pink and blue); upper cover carries lovely blind-stamped mandorla (NSv 1 Déroche class.) and tooled border with simple cornerpieces; lower cover carries smaller blind-stamped mandorla (OSh 3 Déroche class.) and pendants (repeated on envelope flap); fore-edge flap carries label "بركوى مرحومك حديث اربعين ..." ; very tightly bound with sewing difficult to examine; worked chevron endbands in dark gray [or brown] and yellow, quite good condition; overall in fair condition with much abrasion to upper cover, apparent loss of lower cover though now replaced (lower cover and flap likely recycled cover), repairs at edges of lower cover (perhaps following trimming), etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of two main types; opening type (through p.60) with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27-28 mm. apart (horizontal), watermark of figure / angel in circle with four-lobed leaf above (see p.12, 14, 44, etc.) and countermark of "G Z" (resembling "G 3") under three-lobed leaf (see p.16, etc.); second type (from p.61 nearly to close) with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (horizontal), watermark of anchor in circle with six-pointed star above (see p.70, 72, etc.) and countermark of "H S" under trefoil (see p.64, 80, etc.), compare nos. 1758-1785 (dated 1563-1585) in Mošin, Anchor watermarks; all quite sturdy, cream in color, second type slightly thicker and very well-burnished.', 'Decoration: First text has gold rule borders, also section dividers and overlines rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh and nastaʻlīq (talik); variety of hands; some vocalization.', 'Layout: Varies from text to text; from 18-25 lines per page; frame-ruled (impression of misṭarah is most evident).', 'Collation: i, V+1 (11), 2 V (31), IV+1 (40), 4 V (80), IV+1 (89), IV (97), II+2 (103); catchwords present; middle of the quire mark in the form of the khamsah al-ghubārīyah (resembling the Hindu-Arabic numeral ٦) in the upper corner of the right-hand leaf (occasionally also the left-hand) beginning with fol. 6b; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: [1-4?] "...في يوم السبت شهر رجب المجرب في 8 سنة خمس وتسعين وتسعمائة 995" [5] fol. 28a "حرر في اواسط ذي القعدة الشريفة سنة ألف"; [15] fol. 93a "تم...سنة ٩٧٤ [19] fol. 100b "تم بعون الله تع وتوفيقه لابن كمال باشا..."', 'Incipit: "مسئلة فانه قيل ما الفريضة قبل الفريضة وما الفريضة في الفريضة وما الفريضة بعد الفريضة الجواب..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '21. fol. 103 : [quotations, notes on hadīth, prayer, etc.].', '20. fol. 101a-102b : [on hadīth, ʻAshūrāʼ, prayers, etc.].', '19. fol. 95b-100b : [more on hadīth, prayers; excerpts from Ṭabaqāt al-fuqahāʼ / Kemalpaşazade].', '18. fol. 94b-95a : [blank].', '17. fol. 94a : [on hadīth, with quotations, notes].', '16. fol. 93b : [blank].', '15. fol. 81a-93a : Muʻaddil al-ṣalāh / Birgivî Mehmet Efendi (al-Birkawī).', '14. fol. 80b : [quotations, notes].', '13. fol. 80a : [masʼalah, with notes].', '12. fol. 79b : [blank].', '11. fol. 79a : [genealogy chart for the Prophet].', '10. fol. 77b-78b : [on ḥadīth, in yet another hand].', '9. fol. 76b-77a : [on ḥadīth, in a different hand].', '8. fol. 74b-76a : [opens "بسم الله... الحمد لله...انما الاعمال بالنيات"].', '7. fol. 31a-74a : Sharḥ ḥadīth arbaʻīn li-Birkawī Afandī bi-khaṭṭ al-sharīf [opens "الحمد لله الذي ارسل رسوله بالهدى ودين الحق ليظهر..."] / Birgivî Mehmet Efendi (al-Birkawī) [?].', '6. fol. 28b-30b : [blank].', '5. fol. 20b-28a : Kitāb Mubārak fīhi waṣīyat al-Nabī ṣallá Allahu ʻalayhi wa-sallama li-Abī Hurayrah raḍiya Allahu ʻanhu.', '4. fol. 8b-20a : [selection of ḥadīth].', '3. fol. 8a : [blank].', '2. fol. 5b-7b : Kitāb Jawhar farāʼiḍ.', '1. fol. 2b-5a : [Excerpts from al-Muḥīṭ al-burhānī / al-Marghīnānī].', 'A collection (majmūʻah / mecmua) of treatises on ḥadīth, prayer, and other subjects.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 235', 'Origin: As appears in colophon, executed by one Ḥamdī [Hamdî] with possible date or number for this piece.', 'Former shelfmark: "567 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on interior of upper cover.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in golden olive-tinted and gold-flecked paper with black leather over board edges/turn-ins (leather edged / framed binding) ; board linings in yellow-tinted paper ; upper and lower covers carry gold-tooled and gold-painted rosettes and guilloché roll border ; panels hinged together with dark brown to black leather ; in fair condition with some abrasion and lifting of leather at board edges and joints/hinges (some split).', 'Support: Well-burnished European laid paper bordered by strips of marbled paper and tinted-frame (orange, pink, etc. though papers of facing panels match) ; watermark faintly visible in final panel but difficult to make out.', 'Decoration: Written area surrounded by frame consisting of strips of marbled paper (in pink, blue, and white) flanked by white and green fillets and heavy and narrow gold bands outlined in black fillets ; panels within written area surrounded by narrow gold band ; textual dividers in the form illuminated rosettes with white, pink, red and blue accents ; additional illuminated floral accents appear above elongated horizontal strokes and elsewhere to set-off text.', 'Script: Fine specimen of Ottoman calligraphy ; opening line of each page in thuluth ; four centered lines thereafter in naskh ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 5 lines per page, one large line in thuluth and four more compact lines in naskh ; written area divided to upper panel (accommodating the large line) and centered lower panel (for the shorter lines).', "Collation: Ten 'panels' (consisting of written area and border pieces mounted on another leaf) hinged together in accordion format (opens vertically) ; 'pagination' in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, appears in the upper left-hand corner of each panel.", 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads: "كتبه المذنب حمدى ۷۹"', 'Explicit: "وللخازن مثل ذلك لا ينقض بعضهم اجر بعض شيئا اللهم صل وسلم على اشرف الخلق محمد واله الطاهرين"', 'Incipit: "قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم عن ابي هريرة رض قال قال النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم اذا مضى شطر الليل او ثلثاه ينزل الله تبارك وتعالى الى سماء الدنيا ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine album of calligraphy (muraqqaʻ or murakkaa) employing the text of assorted ḥadīth, executed by one Hamdî.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 253', "Origin: As appears in colophons on p.69, p.110, and p.451, entire majmūʻah likely copied by Hābīl ibn ʻUmar with transcription of Kitāb al-Chighmīnī finished 26 Rabīʻ I 1095 [ca. 13 March 1684], transcription of Ashkāl al-taʼsīs completed 19 Ṣafar 1095 [ca. 6 February 1684], and transcription of al-Shāfiyah completed 12 Muḥarram 1093 [ca. 21 January 1682]. Completion of transcription for the other works not specified, but likely falling between 1682 and 1684. Colophon on p.367 would indicated that Matn al-Bayḍāwī fī al-naḥw was copied by ʻUmar al-Marsawī [?] [perhaps the copyist's father] with transcription completed 9 Rabīʻ I 1060 [ca. 12 March 1650], though the copyist very likely simply copied this verbatim from the exemplar.", 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip of ruled paper with "Jaghmīnī | Mulakhkhaṣ | trans. into German | 2 DMG | 47, L13" in pencil -- b. Insert carrying glosses tipped in (paginated pp.373-374).', 'Former shelfmark: "219 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "18" inscribed in pencil on \'title page’ (p.3) ; "٣٢٣" on tail edge.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; two-piece binding (overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; pastedowns and flyleaves (as well as flap lining) in a fine marbled paper (in red, blue, light green, and maroon) ; upper and lower covers carry gold-tooled elongated central lozenge and roll border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in light blue thread, two stations, failing with many gatherings loose ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and light blue, some damage but in fair condition ; overall in fairly good condition with only minor abrasion and lifting of leather ; fore edge flap somewhat small.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types, all well-burnished ; opening type with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 20-21 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of large, elaborate scrollwork / arms with two stars (see p.12-13), scrollwork / arms with mermaid or figure above (see p.8, 18, etc.), another scrollwork / arms with chevrons and again figure above (see p.6, 20) ; another type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three hats (see p.32-33, etc.), sturdy and slightly thicker ; another type with 11-12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 27-28 mm. apart (vertical) and watermark of lion rampant (see p.112), quite sturdy ; some leaves tinted (pink, orange, ochre, etc.), others untinted but silver-flecked, and still others both tinted and silver-flecked.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of a narrow gold band outlined with black fillets ; several diagrams in red and black (see p.7, etc.).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; bold, elegant hand ; serifless, with characteristic descent of words to baseline ; elongation of horizontal strokes as well as exaggerated contrast in thickness as compared to vertical strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board clearly evident).', 'Collation: ii, 3 V(30), III (36), 3 V(66), VII (80), 14 V(220), ii ; chiefly quinions ; several leaves between each work left blank ; catchwords present in opening work, then lacks proper catchwords but last word of final line on the verso of each leaf is usually repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes some flyleaves and inserts, skips two pages between pp.203-204 and skips ahead ten pages from 333 to 344).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '20. p.452-p.454 : [blank].', '19. p.372-p.451 : al-Shāfiyah / ʻUthmān ibn ʻUmar Ibn al-Ḥājib.', '18. p.368-p.371 : [blank].', '17. p.322-p.367 : Matn al-Bayḍāwī fī al-naḥw / ʻAbd Allāh ibn ʻUmar al-Bayḍāwī.', '16. p.314-p.321 : [blank].', '15. p.302-p.313 : Tahdhīb al-manṭiq / Saʻd al-Dīn Masʻūd ibn ʻUmar al-Taftazānī.', '14. p.296-p.301 : [blank].', '13. p.292-p.295 : al-Risālah al-waḍʻīyah / ʻAḍud al-Dīn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Aḥmad al-Ījī.', '12. p.284-p.291 : Risālat al-istiʻārah / Abū al-Qāsim ibn Abī Bakr al-Laythī al-Samarqandī.', '11. p.282-p.283 : Matn al-Ḥanafīyah / ʻAḍud al-Dīn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Aḥmad al-Ījī.', '10. p.277-p.281 : [blank].', '9. p.164-p.276 : Tahdhīb al-kalām / Saʻd al-Dīn Masʻūd ibn ʻUmar al-Taftāzānī.', '8. p.158-p.163 : [blank].', '7. p.116-p.157 : Hidāyah fī al-ḥikmah / al-Mufaḍḍal ibn ʻUmar Athīr al-Dīn al-Abharī.', '6. p.111-p.115 : [blank].', '5. p.76-p.110 : Ashkāl al-taʼsīs / Muḥammad ibn Ashraf al-Samarqandī.', '4. p.70-p.75 : [blank].', '3. p.4-p.69 : Kitāb al-Chaghmīnī / Maḥmūd ibn Muḥammad al-Jaghmīnī.', '2. p.2-p.3 : [blank].', '1. p.1 : [contents listing].', 'Elegant copy of a collection (majmūʻah / mecmua) of treatises on assorted topics. Contents listed on second flyleaf at opening of codex (p.1).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 252', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.281, opening works copied in the town (qaṣabah) of Ṭihrān by ʻAlī Riz̤ā ibn Ḥasan al-ʻAqlānī [?] al-Tankānī [?] with transcription completed in 1083 [1672 or 3]. As appears in colophon on p.334, al-Multaqayāt min kalām Aflaṭūn copied by Ibn Mīr Muḥammad Salīm al-Rāzī Sayyid Muḥammad al-Ḥusaynī with transcription completed 1098 [1686 or 7]. As appears in colophon on p.515, final work also copied by Ibn Mīr Muḥammad Salīm al-Rāzī Sayyid Muḥammad al-Ḥusaynī with transcription completed in Shaʻbān 1098 [June-July 1687].', 'Former shelfmark: "٤٢٢" on paper spine label ; "254 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf (p.2) ; "216" inscribed in pencil on opening \'title page\' (p.3).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in bright pink surface-dyed wove paper ; upper and lower covers carry octagonal central ornament and square cornerpieces built up of blind tooled rosettes as well as blind-tooled border in series of striated s-shaped stamps ; sewn in magenta thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and red, good condition ; overall in fair condition with significant abrasion, moisture damage, lifting and losses of leather, etc.', 'Support: non-European (Persian) laid paper of perhaps two types ; opening type with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and rare chain lines visible, dark cream in color, thin and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished ; final type (from p.283) with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) , quite thin, crisp and transluscent ; staining and tidelines.', 'Decoration: Section headings rubricated ; overlining in red ; lacunae in text of final work where rubrics left unfilled.', 'Script: Naskh and naskh nastaʻlīq ; two clear Persianate hands ; opening through p.281 in a fine naskh-nastaʻlīq, serifless, with tilt to the right, effect of words descending to baseline and superscripting of letters and words ; latter collection of philosophical treatises (from p.283 on) in an elegant naskh, partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serif, with mainly open counters, curvilinear descenders, adhering closely to baseline, and pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 16, 21, 22, and 18 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV (8), III (14), 2 IV(30), III (36), 27 IV(252), II+1 (257), ii ; mainly quaternions with occasional ternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '8. p.516 : [discussion in Persian of philosophical topics addressed in the preceding pages].', '7. p.283-p.515 : [collection of brief treatises on philosphical topics (see listing on p.283) opening with al-Multaqayāt min kalām Aflāṭūn].', '6. p.282 : [assorted excerpts].', '5. p.70-p.281 : [Tafsīr al-Fātiḥah, or Iʻjāz al-bayān fī tafsīr umm al-Qurʼān] / Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Qūnawī.', '4. p.66-p.69 : Faṣl fī bayān miqdār al-sanah wa-taʻyīn al-ayyām al-ālihīyah allatī minhā yawm al-qiyāmah / Kamāl al-Dīn ʻAbd al-Razzāq.', '3. p.54-p.65 : [Sharḥ Arbaʻīn ḥadīthan].', '2. p.28-p.54 : Wāridāt Shaykh Badr al-Dīn al-Shāshī / Badr al-Dīn al-Shāshī [?].', '1. p.3-p.28 : [al-Nuṣūṣ] / Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Qūnawī.', "Fine composite collection (majmūʻah / mecmua) of several works of Ṣūfism, ḥadīth, tafsīr, and philosophy, including works by Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Qūnawī (d.1274), Badr al-Dīn al-Shāshī [?], Kamāl al-Dīn ʻAbd al-Razzāq al-Qāshānī (d. 1330?), etc. Contents listing at opening on 'title page' (p.1)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 155', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.25, Muʻaddil al-ṣalāh copied by ʻAbd Allāh ibn Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn ʻAlī with transcription finished in 1103 [1691 or 2]. As appears in colophon on p.77, al-Muqaddimah fī al-ṣalāh also copied by ʻAbd Allāh ibn Yār Aḥmad with transcription finished in 1103 [1691 or 2]. As appears in colophon on p.112, transcription of Sharḥ al-Fiqh al-akbar completed in 1107 [1695 or 6]. Final work ends abruptly and lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests late 17th or 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 160. Tracts on law & religion."', 'Binding: Pasteboards (very thin) covered in block-stamped paper with brown leather over spine and edges/turn-ins ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations ; worked endbands in pink and yellow, poor condition ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, some lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, moisture damage, etc. ; housed in envelope.', 'Support: European laid paper of around three types ; first two works supplied on a European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22-23 mm. apart (horizontal), watermark in crown above bar carrying initials with grapes / raisin resembling studded diamond shape below, thin and transluscent though sturdy, and well-burnished ; Sharḥ al-Fiqh al-akbar supplied on a European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), coat of arms watermark with two lions flanking cross in shield above two circles, well-burnished, and thin but sturdy ; final work, al-Talwīḥ supplied on two types of European laid paper with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (horizontal), sturdy and well-burnished, one type with three hats watermark (top hat), other type with three hats watermark (hat with brim and feather).', 'Decoration: Keywords, abbreviation symbols and some vocalization rubricated ; occasional overlining in red.', "Script: Naskh ; several Turkish hands, some showing greater influence of nastaʻlīq ; first two works supplied in a clear Turkish hand, virtually serifless, effect of tilt to the left, mainly closed counters, final yāʼ and alif maqṣūrah often mardūdah, pointing in distinct dots ; third work supplied in a rounded hand, virtually serifless, freely ligatured, with pointing in curved lines and inverted caret and 'bowl' of final nūn forming a complete circle around its dot ; final work supplied in still a different hand, mainly serifless (though with occasional head serifs on lām and alif), mainly closed counters, effect of tilt to the left, slight effect of words descending to baseline ; several other hands suppliying glosses and excerpts.", 'Layout: Written in 19, 21 and 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 4 IV(32), IV+1 (41), IV (49), III+1 (56), 4 V(96), II (100) ; mainly quaternions and quinions ; catchwords present in al-Talwīḥ, elsewhere proper catchwords lacking but last word of final line on the verso of each leaf is usually repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '8. p.116-p.200 : al-Talwīḥ ʻalá al-Tawḍīḥ [incomplete] / Saʻd al-Dīn Masʻūd ibn ʻUmar al-Taftāzānī.', '7. p.113-p.115 : [blank].', '6. p.86-p.112 : Sharḥ al-Fiqh al-akbar / Abū al-Muntahá Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad al-Maghnīsāwī.', '5. p.78-p.85 : [assorted excerpts, partly blank].', '4. p.26-p.77 : [al-Muqaddimah fī al-ṣalāh] / Abū al-Layth al-Samarqandī.', '3. p.4-p.25 : Muʻaddil al-ṣalāh / Birgivî Mehmet Efendi.', '2. p.3 : [assorted excerpts and waqf statement].', '1. p.1-p.2 : [blank].', 'Careful copy of a collection (majmūʻah / mecmua) of works on prayer and Ḥanafī fiqh.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 157', "Origin: A dated excerpt [?] at the close of Sharḥ al-Fiqh al-akbar on p.206 may provide a rough terminous post quem of Jumādá I 1047 [September-October 1637], however this may also be a corrupted reading of the date of composition for the commentary transmitted by the copyist. Paper suggests late 16th or very early 17th century. As appears in colophon on p.340, al-Ḥillī's al-Kāfiyah al-badīʻīyah copied by Asad Allāh ibn Darvīsh ʻArab in the town of Jilb [Julb ? i.e. جلب though طبب is also a possible reading] with transcription finished 12 Ramaḍān 974 [ca. 23 March 1567].", 'Accompanying materials: In two works of tafsīr, several inserts carrying notes (paginated pp.235-236, pp.239-240, pp.241-242, pp.245-246, pp.249-250, pp.253-254).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 105. Tracts on law & religion."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in very dark brown leather with tan leather over spine and foreedge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla filled with vegetal composition (compare Deroche class. OSd, similar to OSd 1 or OSd 8) ; sewn in light pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and pink, headband half-gone, tailband in fair condition ; overall in poor condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather (especially at foreedge flap), delamination of boards, some shrinkage and negative draw in upper cover, etc. ; repairs in red leather.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; opening work supplied on a European paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 20 mm. apart (horizontal), watermark consisting of cross in shield with letters "AMB" below, well-burnished, thin and transluscent ; works of tafsīr and assorted excerpts on a European paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 30 mm. apart (horizontal), crown star (six-pointed) crescent watermark (compare Heawood 1132), thick and burnished ; al-Kāfiyah al-badīʻīyah to end supplied on a European paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced roughly 30 mm. apart (horizontal), anchor in circle watermark (six-pointed star above?), very smooth and well-burnished ; minor blocking in some sections due to tacky ink.', 'Decoration: Some marginalia and abbreviation symbols rubricated in opening work ; headings and keywords in al-Kāfiyah al-badīʻīyah rubricated ; written area of incipit and facing page for Sharḥ al-Fiqh al-akbar surrounded by frame consisting of heavy gold band outlined by black fillets.', 'Script: Naskh ; several fine hands ; opening hand virtually serifless with effect of tilt to the left, open and closed counters, very slight effect of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated) ; al-Kāfiyah al-badīʻīyah supplied in an elegant Persianate hand with mainly open counters, tapered, rectilinear descenders, fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 19, 20, 21 and 33 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 10 V(100), I (102), 2 V+1(124), V-1 (133), VI (145), V (155), 2 V(175), II (179), i ; chiefly quinions ; appears to be a leaf missing between pp.262-263 ; opening work lacks proper catchwords but last word of final line on the verso of each leaf is usually repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; catchwords present in most other works and assorted excerpts ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and inserts).', 'Colophon: [al-Qaṣīdah al-Kāfiyah al-badīʻīyah] "Scribal," "rectangular, reads: تمت بحمد الله وعونه وحسن توفيقه غفر الله تعالى لكاتبها وناظمها ولمن قراء فيها ودعا لهما بالتوبة والمغفرة ولساير المسلمين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين وسلم تسليما كثيرا وكان الفراغ من كتابتها يوم الاحد اثنا عشر شهر رمضان المبارك سنة اربع وسبعين وتسعمايه در بلده جلب [طبب ؟] در محله زاويه كتابت شد كاتب العبد اسد الله بن درويش عرب تم"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '10. p.341-p.372 : [al-Natāʼij al-ilāhīyah fī sharḥ al-Kāfiyah al-badīʻīyah] / Ṣafī al-Dīn ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz ibn Sarāyā al-Ḥillī.', '9. p. 325-p.340 : al-Qaṣīdah al-Kāfiyah al-badīʻīyah fī al-madāʼiḥ al-nabawīyah / Ṣafī al-Dīn ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz ibn Sarāyā al-Ḥillī.', '8. p.256-p.324 : [assorted excerpts on various topics (see listing on p.2) from Munyat al-mushtāqīn, Ḥayāt al-qulūb, Munyat al-wāiʻẓīn, etc.] / [Muḥammad Bāqir Majlisī, etc.].', '7. p.238-p.255 : [Tafsīr Sūrat al-Mulk] / Kemalpaşazade.', '6. p.210-p.237 : [Tafsīr Sūrat Yāsīn] / al-Ḥanafī [?].', '5. p.207-p.209 : [mainly blank with a few excerpts].', '4. p.4-p.206 : [Sharḥ al-Fiqh al-akbar] / Abū al-Muntahá Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad al-Maghnīsāwī.', '3. p.3 : [excerpts].', '2. p.2 : [listing of contents].', '1. p.1 : [blank].', 'Composite collection (majmūʻah / mecmua) of tracts on legal and religious subjects.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 255', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.134, transcription of Kitāb al-Ḥudūd wa-al-aḥkām completed in 1063 [1652 or 3], from a copy in the hand of the author. As appears in colophon on p.291, transcription of final work (and perhaps that of Ibn Quṭlūbughā) completed in Dhū al-Qaʻdah 1050 [February 1641]. Remaining works likely also copied in the 17th century (as suggested by hand and paper).', 'Former shelfmark: "٧٥" on spine label ; "401 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf (p.1) ; "214" inscribed in pencil on \'title page’ (p.3).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though fully detached) ; board linings in marbled paper (in olive green, dark blue and white) ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold-painted scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal decoration, compare Déroche class. OAi 8) with accents and tooled border in gold ; sewn in cream thread, two stations, some thread breakage ; worked chevron endbands in light pink and cream, damaged (tailband especially) ; overall in somewhat poor condition with flap detached, upper cover detaching, some abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European laid paper of at least two types ; opening type with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and rare chain lines partially visible ; from p.64 another type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical, quite indistinct) and chains rarely visible, thinner, though sturdy, medium to dark cream in color ; pp.136-148 and pp.157-202 on a European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of paschal lamb in four-lobed circle (see p.136, 138, etc. and compare Agneau pascal nos. 9-24 (dated 17th century) in Velkov, Les Filigranes dans les documents Ottomans) ; from p.203 another European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal) and watermark (difficult to make out) ; some leaves tinted beige or buff (a light orange color).', 'Decoration: Keywords, abbreviation symbols, and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas ; gold frame surrounds the written area of the first two works and final two works (work of Ibn Quṭlūbughā and work of Taşköprüzade) ; illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) appears at the opening of the work of Ibn Quṭlūbughā (p.204) ; another illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) appears the opening of the work by Taşköprüzade (p.254).', 'Script: Naskh and nastaʻlīq (talik) ; three elegant Turkish hands ; opening two works (pp.4-p.58) copied in the same fine naskh ; next several works (pp.64-202) in a fine nastaʻlīq (talik) ; final two works (pp.203-291) in another nastaʻlīq (talik).', 'Layout: Written in 27, 25 and 31 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 2 V(20), IV (28), I (30), 3 V(60), II (64), I (66), II+3 (73), II (77), V+1 (88), I+1 (91), IV+1 (100), 2 V(120), II (124), V+1 (135), V (145), i ; leaves between works left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (for entire majmūʻah and for Kitāb al-Ḥudūd wa-al-aḥkām) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '19. p.292-p.293 : [assorted excerpts].', '18. p.253-p.291 : Ṭabaqāt al-fuqahāʼ / Taşköprüzade.', '17. p.203-252 : Ṭabaqāt fuqahāʼ al-Ḥanafīyah / al-Qāsim Ibn Quṭlūbughā.', '16. p.197-p.202 : Risālah fī taḥqīq masʼalat dukhūl walad al-bint fī al-mawqūf ʻalá awlād al-awlād / Kemalpaşazade.', '15. p.185-p.196 : Risālah mutaʻalliqah bi-al-waqf / Shāh Afandī Dāmād Abī al-Saʻūd.', '14. p.175-p.184 : Risālah mutaʻalliqah bi-al-waqf / Ebüssuud Efendi.', '13. p.174 : [blank].', '12. p.159-p.173 : Risālah mutaʻalliqah bi-masāʼil al-masḥ / Ebüssuud Efendi.', '11. p.149-p.158 : [al-Fatāwá] al-ʻArabīyah al-mutaʻalliqah bi-al-waqf / Ebüssuud Efendi.', '10. p.148 : [blank].', '9. p.135-p.147 : Risālah mutaʻalliqah bi-al-waqf / Ebüssuud Efendi.', '8. p.64-p.134 : Kitāb al-Ḥudūd wa-al-aḥkām / Muṣannifak ʻAlī ibn Majd al-Dīn ibn al-Shāhrūdī al-Bisṭāmī.', '7. p.62-63 : [blank].', '6. p.60-p.61 : [table of contents for Kitāb al-Ḥudūd wa-al-aḥkām].', '5. p.59 : [blank].', '4. p.36-p.58 : al-Risālah al-arḍīyah.', '3. p.35 : [blank].', '2. p.4-p.34 : [al-Siyāsah al-sharʻīyah] / Dede Efendi.', '1. p.3 : [contents listing].', "Fine copy of a collection (majmūʻah / mecmua) of treatises on legal matters. Contents listed in detail on 'title page' (p.3)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 158', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.52, al-Arbaʻūn al-Nawawīyah copied in the Aḥmadīyah madrasah with transcription finished in Ramaḍān 1121 [?] [November 1709?]. As appears in colophon on p.93, Sharḥ Īsāghūjī copied by Ismāʻīl ibn Zunayl [?] with no mention of date of transcription. As appears in colophon on p.136, transcription of al-Iʻrāb ʻan qawāʻid al-iʻrāb completed in the year 1096 [1684 or 5]. As appears in colophon on p.231, al-Ḥamdīyah copied by ʻUmar ibn Ḥusayn with transcription completed in the year 1085 [1674 or 5]. As appears in colophon on p.324, final work also copied by ʻUmar ibn Ḥusayn al-Zamwānī [?] with transcription completed in the year 1084 [1673 or 4].', 'Accompanying materials: Scrap with notes (paginated pp.55-56).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 104. Tracts on grammar, etc."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (in dark blue, light pink, white) with dark red leather over spine, foreedge flap and edges/turn-ins ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; sewn in bright blue (cyan), yellow, and lime green thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in light blue and cream, in fair condition ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, some lifting of paper and leather, etc.', "Support: European laid paper of several types ; opening work supplied on a European paper with 12-13 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22 mm. apart (horizontal), watermark in crown with studded pendant, thin though sturdy, and burnished ; second and third works supplied on a European paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (horizontal), crown star crescent watermark (compare Heawood 1132), well-burnished, thick and sturdy ; next work and excerpts supplied on a European paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), scrollwork/coat of arms watermark, extremely smooth and well-burnished (to glossy) ; final work on a European paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 33 mm. apart (horizontal), coat of arms watermark with lions flanking cross in shield above two circles ('AS' in upper circle), thin, smooth and well-burnished.", 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviations symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh and naskh-nastaʻlīq ; several hands ; opening work in an elegant naskh with subtle head serifs on occasional initial lām and freestanding alif, tilt to the left, mainly open counters, mainly curvilinear descenders, final hāʼ or tāʼ marbūtah assimilated with preceding rāʼ or dāl, fully vocalized ; al-Iʻrāb in fine naskh-nastaʻlīq [closer to nastaʻlīq] virtually serifless with mainly closed counters, effect of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), letterforms characteristic of nastaʻlīq ; following works in fine naskh similar to opening hand though virtually serifless with tilt to the left, mainly closed counters, many curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 11, 15 and 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 2 V (20), III (26), 3 V(56), V+1 (67), V (77), V+1 (88), 3 V(118), V+1 (129), 2 V(149), I (151), V (161), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert and back flyleaf).', 'Incipit:', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '10. p.325-p.326 : [excerpts and calligraphic excercises].', '9. p.242-p.324 : [Sharḥ al-Bināʼ ?].', '8. p.232-p.241 : [mainly blank with a few excerpts].', '7. p.140-p.231 : [al-Ḥamdīyah : Ḥāshiyah ʻalá Sharḥ dībājat al-Miṣbāḥ] / Aḥmad ibn ʻImād.', '6. p.137-p.139 : [blank].', '5. p.96-p.136 : al-Iʻrāb ʻan qawāʻid al-iʻrāb / Ibn Hishām.', '4. p.94-p.95 : [mainly blank with a few prayers, excerpts, etc.].', '3. p.54-p.93 : [Sharḥ Īsāghūjī] / Ḥusām al-Dīn Kātī.', '2. p.53 : [blank].', '1. p.2-p.52 : [al-Arbaʻūn al-Nawawīyah] / al-Nawawī.', 'Fine composite collection (majmūʻah / mecmua) of works on hadith, logic, grammar, etc.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 153', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.93, third work copied by Aḥmad ibn Walī al-Arzanjānī [Ahmet Veli Erzincanlı] with transcription finished Jumādá II 1137 [February-March 1725]. As appears in colophon on p.183, ʻUmdat al-aḥkām also copied by Aḥmad ibn Walī al-Arzanjānī [Ahmet Veli Erzincanlı] in the Sulaymānīyah madrasah of Mecca (Sultan Süleymân Medresesi, Mekke\'de) with transcription finished Wednesday, 9 Rabīʻ I 1128 [ca. 3 March 1716]. As with several other works and excerpts in this codex, copied from the manuscript of ʻAbd Allāh ibn Sālim al-Makkī al-Baṣrī ("نقلت هذه النسخة الشريفة من نسخة الاستاذ ... عبد الله بن سالم المكي ... البصري"). As appears in colophon on p.322, al-Asrār al-marfūʻah fī al-akhbār al-mawḍūʻah copied in Mecca also by Aḥmad ibn Walī al-Arzanjānī [Ahmet Veli Erzincanlı] with transcription completed in Rajab 1128 [June-July 1716]. As appears in colophon on p.333, al-Niʻmah al-kubrá also copied in Mecca by Aḥmad ibn Walī al-Arzanjānī [Ahmet Veli Erzincanlı] with transcription completed in 1128 [1716]. Some excerpts also dated and with place of transcription specified (see p.189 "... كتب في عاشر من شعبان في مكة المكرمة سنة ۱۱۲۸").', 'Accompanying materials: Several inserts carrying notes, glosses, etc. (paginated pp.55-56, pp.79-80, pp.147-148, pp.167-168, pp.341-342) along with a leaf from another ms. (paginated pp.351-352).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 85. Collection of homilies, traditions, etc."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather with envelope flap and interior of fore edge flap in tan leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in yellow-tinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry scalloped blind-stamped mandorla and epigraphic pendants ("حاجي احمد") with blind-tooled rosette accents forming crescent adjacent to mandorla and border in tooled fillets ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in blue and cream, headband cut from textblock (primaries) and adhering to spine lining (primaries stitched through), tailband still attached to textblock but only partially ; overall in poor condition with much abrasion, some staining, moisture damage, etc. ; textblock fully detached from cover, which is certainly roomy in the spine and may have originally been intended for a different textblock ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: What appears to be a European laid paper with 11-12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart, but remarkably, no watermarks visible ; well-sized and burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; written area surrounded by red rule-border (through p.22) ; occasional textual dividers in the form of red discs ; occasional abbreviation symbols in red ; some overlining in black and red ink.', 'Script: Naskh ; several hands ; mainly a fine Turkish hand, partially seriffed with left-sloping barbed head serif on final lām, occasional head serifs on alif, initial lām, etc., effect of tilt to the left, mainly open counters, rightward descenders mainly tapered, rounded and somewhat freely ligatured ; another hand showing influence of nastaʻlīq, with tilt to the right, elongation of horizontal strokes, mainly closed counters, final nūn often reversed (re-curved) ; partially vocalized ; headings in larger, bolder script.', 'Layout: Written in 25-31 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 4 V(40), III (46), IV (54), V (64), 2 VI (88), 9 V(178), II (182) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in blank ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, in ʻUmdat al-aḥkām (begins on p.119 with ۲) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf and inserts ; skips two pages between pp.323-324).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '15. p.376 : [blank].', '14. p.336-p.375 : Mashāriq al-anwār / al-Ṣaghānī.', '13. p.334-p.335 : [assorted excerpts].', '12. p.324-p.333 : al-Niʻmah al-kubrá ʻalá al-ʻālam bi-mawlid sayyid banī Ādam / Ibn Ḥajar al-Haytamī.', '11. p.323-p.[] : [assorted excerpts].', '10. p.190-p.322 : [al-Asrār al-marfūʻah fī al-akhbār al-mawḍūʻah] / al-Qārī al-Harawī.', '9. p.184-p.189 : [assorted excerpts].', '8. p.118- p.183 : [ʻUmdat al-aḥkām] / ʻAbd al-Ghanī ibn ʻAbd al-Wāḥid al-Jammāʻīlī al-Maqdisī.', '7. p.113-p.117 : [assorted excerpts and table of contents for ʻUmdat al-aḥkām].', '6. p.99-p.112 : [al-Ḥarf al-kāf, excerpt from al-Jāmiʻ al-ṣaghīr] / al-Suyūṭī.', '5. p.94-p.98 : [partially blank, carrying assorted excerpts from Mirqāt al-mafātīḥ, al-Maṣābīḥ, etc.].', '4. p.88-p.93 : [Risālah mushtamilah ʻalá taḥqīq masaʼlat al-ishārah bi-al-misbaḥah fī al-ṣalāh].', '3. p.65-p.87 : [excerpt from al-Jāmiʻ al-ṣaghīr] /al-Suyūṭī.', '2. p.6-p.64 : [excerpt from Tanbīh al-ghāfilīn] / Abū al-Layth al-Samarqandī.', "1. p.1-p.5 : [originally blank, now carry excerpts, owners' marks, etc.].", 'Careful copy of a collection (majmūʻah / mecmua) of works and excerpts on hadīth.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 154', "Origin: All works appear to be in the hand of a single copyist, named in the colophons which appear following a few of the works (see p.24, p.119, p.144, and p.177) as Muḥammad al-Qāriṣī [al-Qarṣī] ibn Uways ibn Muḥammad ibn Ramaḍān (Mehmet Üveys Karsî) for or while in the service of Mevlana Mahmut müftü of Kars Erzurum. As appears in colophon on p.24, transcription of al-Tibrīzī al-Ḥanafī's Sharḥ al-Risālah al-ʻAḍudīyah fī al-ādāb [al-Risālah al-Ḥanafīyah] finished Rabīʻ II 1155 [June-July 1742]. As appears in colophon on p.119, transcription of Risālat Ḥallāl al-mushkilāt finished in the city of Kars, Erzurum (vilayet) 1 Rabīʻ I 1155 [ca. 6 May 1742]. As appears in colophon on p.144, transcription of Kāshifat ḥāl al-mawtá completed 8 Rabīʻ I 1155 [ca. 13 May 1742]. As appears in colophon on p.177, transcription of Risale-yi Hakanî completed in Rabīʻ I 1155 [May-June 1742].", 'Accompanying materials: Slips carrying glosses tipped in (paginated pp.49-50, pp.55-56).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 74. Collection of tracts."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in combed marbled paper (in red, blue, and yellow ; see interior of flap) with dark brown leather over spine, foreedge flap, and edges/turn-ins ; entire cover now fitted with custom textile jacket / detachable overcover (see p.246-247, 453 in Julia Miller, Books will speak plain) in light green-blue linen, stiched across board linings in heavy cream and blue thread (yarn) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked endbands in green and red, fair condition ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, staining, tearing, etc.', "Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and major chain lines spaced roughly 23-24 mm. apart (horizontal) but spaced roughly 6-8 mm. from apparently minor chain lines (giving the effect of chain lines grouped in pairs) ; watermark with crown above fleur de lis, studded pendant and initials 'GB' 'MF' below ; well-sized and burnished ; some inclusions ; thin but sturdy ; moisture damage obscures text in upper inner corners of written area.", 'Decoration: Titles, section headings, keywords, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh influenced by nastaʻlīq ; all works mainly in one fine Eastern Anatolian hand, virtually serifless with effect of tilt to the right, mainly closed counters, some elongation of descenders and horizontal strokes, slight effect of words descending to baseling, freely ligatured, point of final nūn often assimilated with bowl, final yāʼ often mardūdah, etc.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 21 lines per page ; written area of a few texts divded to four and two columns to set off poetry ; frame-ruled.', "Collation: 6 V (60), V+1 (71), V (81), VI (93), V (103), IV+1 (112) ; chiefly quinions ; 'quire numbering' in the form of whole words roughly every ten leaves toward the middle of each quire (often the leaf following the middle bifolium, see p.35, p.57, p.77, p.97, etc.) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).", 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '25. p.224-p.228 : [blank].', '24. p.206-p.223 : [Risālah fī al-tajwīd]/ Muṣṭafá al-Anṭākī.', '23. p.205 : [blank].', '22. p.178-p.204 : Hilye-yi Hakanî / Hakanî Mehmet Bey.', '21. p.164-p.177 : Risale-yi Hakanî / Hakanî Mehmet Bey.', '20. p.163 : [blank].', '19. p.152-p.162 : Risālah fī al-kabāʼir wa-al-ṣaghāʼir min al-dhunūb / Ibn Nujaym.', '18. p.150-p.151 : [Risālah fī al-fiʻl al-iṣṭilāḥī] / Kadızade Mehmet [?].', '17. p.148-p.149 : [Risālah ṣaghīrat al-ḥajm fī mā istafadtu mimmā yataʻallaqu bil-Qurān al-ʻaẓīm] / Kadızade Mehmet [?].', '16. p.145-p.147 : [blank].', '15. p.122-p.144 : Kāshifat ḥāl al-mawtá / Kadızade Mehmet [?].', '14. p.120-p.121 : [blank].', '13. p.106-p.119 : Risālat Ḥallāl al-mushkilāt / Fatḥ Allāh ibn Maḥmūd al-Mawṣilī.', '12. p.78-p.105 : Kitāb al-Munabbihāt / Ibn Ḥajar al-ʻAsqalānī.', '11. p.76-p.77 : [assorted excerpts].', '10. p.42-p.75 : Risālat al-ʻadl fī bayān ḥāl al-Khiḍr / Numân Paşa bin Mustafa Paşa Köprülü.', '9. p.36-p.41 : [blank].', '8. p.26-p.35 : [Tafsīr Sūrat al-Mulk] / Kemalpaşazade.', '7. p.25 : [blank].', '6. p.18-p.24 : Risālah-yi ʻAḍudī fī al-ādāb [i.e. Sharḥ al-Risālah al-ʻAḍudīyah fī al-ādāb] / al-Tibrīzī al-Ḥanafī.', '5. p.17 : [originally left blank, now carries waqf statement].', '4. p.12-p.16 : al-Fāriqah bayna al-sāʻāt al-saʻīdah wa-al-naḥisah / Kadızade Mehmet Necip [?].', '3. p.8-p.11 : [blank].', '2. p.7 : [table of contents].', '1. p.1-p.6 : [blank].', "Clear copy of a collection of treatises (majmūʻah / mecmua) on assorted topics. Contents listed on fore-edge flap label and 'table of contents' (p.7)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 657', 'Origin: As appears in opening statement on p.9 and in colophons on p.111 and p.203, bulk of majmūʻah copied for himself by ʻUthmān ibn Muṣṭafá Karāmah [?]. As appears in colophon on p.111, transcription of Bard al-akbād and Nubdhah mukhtaṣarah min Rawḍ al-akhyār completed during the first part of Rabīʻ II 1155 [June 1742]. As appears in colophon on p.203, transcription of Kitāb al-Mudhhab fī al-ḥulá completed in Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1155 [January-February 1743]. Transcription of other works likely completed around the same time. What appears to be date of composition for Takhmīs Bānat Suʻād supplied by fractions on p.239, likely 113-? [1718-1727?].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Three inventory cataloguing slips (and two scraps) in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inscription on inner front cover and spine label, "IL 31b" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in now dull beige laid paper with dark red-brown leather over spine and edges/turn-ins (likely fore edge flap as well, though now lost, framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap, now lost) ; board linings in yellow laid paper ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; overall in somewhat poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather and paper, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper ; opening type with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 22-25 mm. apart (vertical), and watermarks of grapes (raisin) with name and crown (see p.12, 18, 19, 25, etc.), "P FABRE" (p.16, 21, etc.) and "LANGUEDOC" (p.14, 23, etc.) ; another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 23-24 mm. apart (vertical), and crown above name watermark (see p.208, 221, etc.) ; well-burnished to glossy, thin though sturdy, medium cream in color.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and occasional abbrevation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke over certain words) rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas.', "Script: Naskh ; small, clear Turkish or 'Syrian' hand ; mainly serifless with effect of tilt to the right, mainly curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots, some elongation of horizontal strokes, kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred.", 'Layout: Written in 15-21 lines per page ; written area divided to two columns to set off verses.', 'Collation: II (4), 5 V(54), VI (66), V (76), III (82), 3 V(112), VI (124) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (prior to collation, thus due to an initially misplaced bifolium pagination skips from p.222 to p.227, then from p.238 to pp.223-226, then to p.239, foliation is correct).', 'Colophon: [Bard al-akbād] and [Nubdhah mukhtaṣarah min Rawḍ al-akhyār] "Scribal," rectangular, reads "حرر في القسطنطنية في اوائل شهر ربيع الثاني من شهور سنة ۱۱٥٥ على يد الفقير عثمان كرامه" ; [Kitāb al-Mudhhab fī al-ḥulá] "Scribal," rectangular, reads "تم كتابه على يد كاتبها لنفسه ولمن شاء الله من بعده عثمان بن مصطفى كرامه ... وذلك في الديار الرومية حماها رب البرية [؟] في ذي الحجة سنة ۱۱٥٥"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '16. p.247-p.248 : [blank].', '15. p.241-p.246 : Qaṣīdat ʻAbd Allāh Afandī ibn Ḥijāzī / ʻAbd Allāh ibn Muḥammad Ibn Qaḍīb al-Bān.', '14. p.240 : [blank].', '13. p.213-p.239 : Takhmīs Bānat Suʻād / Muḥammad Asaʻd [Mehmet Esat Efendi b. Şeyhülislam Ismail Efendi ?].', '12. p.206-p.212 : [taqrīẓāt for the following takhmīs].', '11. p.205 : [blank].', '10. p.203-204 : [assorted excerpts].', '9. p.133-p.203 : Kitāb al-Mudhhab fī al-ḥulá / Abū ʻAbd Allāh Muḥammad ibn ʻĪsá ibn Muḥammad ibn Aṣbagh ibn al-Munāṣif al-Azdī.', '8. p.120-p.132 : [blank].', '7. p.112-p.119 : [assorted excerpts].', '6. p.89-p.111 : Nubdhah mukhtaṣarah min Rawḍ al-akhyār al-muntakhab min Rabīʻ al-abrār / Khaṭībʻzādah Muḥammad ibn Qāsim al-Amāsī.', '5. p.88 : [blank].', '4. p.86-p.87 : [assorted excerpts].', '3. p.9-p.86 : Bard al-akbād fī al-aʻdād /ʻAbd al-Malik ibn Muḥammad al-Thaʻālibī.', '2. p.4-p.8 : [blank].', '1. p.1-p.3 : [assorted excerpts and contents listing].', 'Fine collection (majmūʻah) of mainly "belles-lettres" (adab / ādāb) works in prose and verse. Contents listing on added leaf at opening (p.2).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 43', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.129, transcription of Tafsīr Abī al-Layth al-Samarqandī completed 15 Ṣafar 1132 [ca. 28 December 1719] ; paper in bulk of codex suggests 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Slips (some tipped in) carrying glosses between pp.50-51, between pp.320-321 and between pp.338-339.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 63. Religious tracts."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in stamped textured paper (in shades of green and gold) with red leather over spine, foreedge flap and edges/turn-ins ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; sewn in (now soiled) cream thread, two stations ; worked endbands in yellow, intact ; overall in fair condition with some minor lifting and losses of paper and leather, staining, abrasion, moisture damage etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of a few types ; mainly with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 20 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark with crown above bar (carrying initials), likely over grapes ; another type with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents (tre lune) watermark ; some staining ; leaves of a few of the latter quires are larger than those of the remainder of the textblock and have been folded to accommodate.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, abbrevation symbols and occasional notabilia rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; occasional overlining in red and green.', 'Script: Naskh ; several Turkish hands ; sporadically seriffed.', 'Layout: Written in mainly 15, 19, 21 and 23 lines per page.', 'Collation: III (6), 5 V(56), IV+1 (65), 8 V(145), I (147), III+1 (154), V (164), III (170), 3 V(200) ; middle of the quire marks in the form of circle or numeral khamsah ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals appears in al-Majālis al-sanīyah ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '30. p.392-p.400 : [blank].', '29. p.362-p.391 : [al-Bāb al-khāmis fī al-tasbīḥ wa-al-taḥmīd wa-al-duʻāʼ, etc. likely from Maṣābīḥ al-sunnah].', '28. p.360-p.361 : [blank].', '27. p.359 : [assorted excerpts].', '26. p.357-p.358 : [blank].', '25. p.342-p.356 : [excerpt].', '24. p.341 : [blank].', '23. p.328-p.340 : [assorted excerpts].', '22. p.327 : [blank].', '21. p.312-p.326 : [assorted excerpts].', '20. p.311 : [blank].', '19. p.310 : [excerpt].', '18. p.308-p.309 : [blank].', '17. p.272-p.307 : [Kitāb al-jihād min al-Ṣiḥāḥ, etc. from Maṣābīḥ al-sunnah].', '16. p.271 : [ḥadīth excerpt].', '15. p.264-p.270 : [blank].', '14. p.131-p.263 : [Kitāb al-Majālis al-sanīyah fī al-kalām ʻalá al-Arbaʻīn al-Nawawīyah, ends abruptly] / Aḥmad ibn Ḥijāzī al-Fashnī.', '13. p.130 : [blank].', '12. p.74-p.129 : [Tafsīr Abī al-Layth al-Samarqandī, an excerpt from the final part] / Abū al-Layth Naṣr ibn Muḥammad al-Samarqandī.', '11. p.72-p.73 : [assorted excerpts].', '10. p.57-p.71 : [Sharḥ āyāt al-Qurʼān].', '9. p.53-p.56 : [partly blank with some excerpts].', '8. p.16-p.52 : [Anwār al-tanzīl wa-asrār al-taʼwīl, an excerpt] / al-Bayḍāwī.', '7. p.14-p.15 : [mainly blank with waqf statement].', '6. p.12-p.13 : [assorted excerpts].', '5. p.11 : [blank].', '4. p.8-p.10 : [commentary on Sūrat al-Qadr].', '3. p.7 : [blank].', '2. p.5-p.6 : [assorted excerpts].', '1. p.1-p.4 : [blank].', "Clear copy of a large collection (majmūʻah / mecmua) of assorted excerpts from works of tafsīr and ḥadīth, including Tafsīr al-Bayḍāwī, Tafsīr Abī al-Layth al-Samarqandī, al-Fashnī's commentary on al-Nawawī's collection of ḥadīth, and what appears to be several excerpts from al-Baghawī's Maṣābīḥ al-sunnah and its commentaries."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 276', "Origin: As appears in colophon on final panel, executed by Ömer Sırrı, one of the students of Mehmet Sadullah Efendi, known as Arabzade. Date of transcription not specified, but likely during Ömer Sırrı's training and thus before the death of Arabzade Mehmet Sadullah Efendi.", 'Binding: Boards covered in red-brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings and lining of opening and closing panel in light blue coated and textured paper ; upper and lower covers carry exquisite tooled vegetal design (swirling leaves and flowers set off by small rosette stamps surrounding central almond-shaped form) in contrasting shades of gold, set in gold tooled borders (also in contrasting colors) in a series of s-shaped stamps and rosettes ; panels edged in red-brown leather with gold-painted rule borders and hinged together with dark pink silk ; overall in good condition ; repairs in Japanese paper (rebacked).', 'Support: Written area on well-burnished paper (untinted or tinted blue, red, etc. or marbled), set in frames of embossed paper (with vegetal designs) tinted various shades (pale peach, olive green, orange, yellow, turquoise, light blue, red, dark green, etc.) with colors of facing panels matching.', 'Decoration: Written area surrounded by frame of heavy gold and colored bands (mainly in blue and red) set off by white fillets ; each specimen (kıta) set in a frame bordered in gold rules ; two specimens chrysographed ; leaves and floral sprays in blue, lavender, pink, green and gold flank colophon at close.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; exquisite specimen Ottoman calligraphy.', 'Layout: Written in four lines per page with logograph for "سعي" under each line.', "Collation: Twelve 'panels' (mounted leaves) hinged together mainly in dark pink silk ; 'pagination' in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals in upper outer corner of panel (frame).", 'Colophon: "نوشته شد بقلم شكتسه سيد عمر سرى كيه دار ناظر ديوان دعاوى صانه الله تعالى عن النقايص والمساوى از شاكر دان حضرت استاد مكارم اعتياد صدر والاى روم ايلى مولانا محمد سعد الله افندى الشهير بعرب زاده همه كا مش بادآ آماده"', 'Explicit: "اثر اميدى ايله عالمده ايلدم بو قطعاتي تحرير اوقور اخوان صفا تاريخن اولدى والا اثر عبد فقير ١١٥٦ "', 'Incipit: "بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم اعظم اسماء عليم حكيم محترمان حرم انس را تازه حديثست ز عهد قديم..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Exquisite calligraphic specimen employing Jāmī's qaṣīdah on the basmalah for mürekkebât meșki exercises, executed by one of the students of Arabzade Mehmet Sadullah Efendi (d.1843)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 507', "Origin: As appears in colophon on p.189, opening work (Riyāḍ al-ṣāliḥīn) copied by Aḥmad ibn al-Ḥusayn ibn Aḥmad Ikhmayyis al-Yarzūtī with transcription completed 8 Rabīʿ I 1250 [ca. 15 July 1834]. The same copyist transcribed the following two works in this earlier section of the codex. As appears in colophon on p.223, transcription of Bushrá al-kaʼīb bi-liqāʼ al-ḥabīb (final page only) completed by ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz ibn Muḥsin [?] al-Ḍiʻāfī [?], presumably following his purchase of the opening section of the codex in Rajab 1275 [Febrary-March 1859] (as per the purchase statement on the 'title page' (p.1) for the opening work). This copyist likely transcribed the subsequent works in this later section of the codex.", 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slips in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inscription on upper board lining "M. 44" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; primaries are sewn through spine lining which extends onto interior of boards under paper hinges ; board linings in untinted paper ; upper and lower covers carry large blind-stamped central mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal decoration) set off by tooled rules and vertical horizontal pendants, as well as blind-tooled floral cornerpieces, rule borders, and interlace borders built up of a repeating samp ; design continues on flap ; sewing difficult to examine, now oversewn, tightly bound ; worked endbands, only primaries and tailband with exposed leather core remains ; overall in fairly good condition with some abrasion, lifting of leather, splitting of upper hinge, etc. ; repair (fill) to lower cover in similar leather.', 'Support: European machine laid and wove paper ; earlier section of codex (through p.222) chiefly in a machine laid type with chain lines (vertical) spaced roughly 27 mm. apart, "laid lines" in a very fine cross-hatch pattern, and watermarks of Fortune, i.e. figure standing on ball and holding banner aloft (see p.80, 84, etc.) and "THOMAS" (see p.82, 86, etc.) ; elsewhere in this section (p.1-78, 219-222) a laid paper with roughly 9-10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 24-26 mm. apart (vertical), watermark difficult to make out (see p.18) and countermark of "M T" / "T M" (see p.4, 6, 26, etc.) ; later section of codex (from p.223 to close) in a dark cream wove paper ; some pigment burn on pp.325-340 ; flyleaves in another wove paper.', 'Decoration: Headings and keywords rubricated or in green ink (from p.173) ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; some vocalization supplied in red ink.', 'Script: Maghribī ; two main hands ; earlier section of codex (through p.222) in a fine hand in a medium line, compact and mainly serifless with sweeping descenders, ascenders on ṭāʼ and ẓāʼ often inclined to the right, pointing in distinct dots ; later section (from p.223 to close) in an elegant hand in a thin to medium line, partially but some what irregularly seriffed with rightward serifs on free-standing alif, ṭāʼ, ẓāʼ, etc., dramatically sweeping curvilinear descenders, many ascenders inclined to the right, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 36 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: ii, 21 IV(168), IV+2 (178), ii ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: [Riyāḍ al-ṣāliḥīn] "Scribal," rectangular, reads "كمل الكتاب المبارك المسمى برياض الصالحين وتحفة المتقين نفعنا الله بمؤلفه وبما ذكر فيه امين يا رب العالمين على يد العبد المذنب الراجي عفو ربه وغفرانه احمد بن الحسين بن احمد اخميس اليرزوتي غفر الله له ولوالديه ولاشياخه ولاحبته ولمن له عليه الحق ولجميع المؤمنين والمؤمنات والمسلمين والمسلمات الاحياء منهم والاموات رب اغفر وارحم وانت خير الراحمين ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم وصلى الله على سيدنا ومولانا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم تسلميا وكان الفراغ منه يوم الاربعاء الثامن من شهر الله ربيع النبا وفي عام خمسين ومائتين والف وسلام على المرسلين والحمد لله رب العالمين" ; [Bushrá al-kaʼīb bi-liqāʼ al-ḥabīb] "Scribal," rectangular, reads "كمل الحديث بحمد الله تعالى وحسن عونه وتوفيقه الجميل على يد كاتبه العبد المذنب ... بذنبه عبد العزيز بن محسن [؟] الضعافي [؟] غفر الله له ولوالديه ولاشياخه وللمؤمنين والمؤمنات والمسلمين والمسلمات الاحياء منهم والاموات يا رب العالمين وكان الفراغ منه في احدى وعشرين في شهر الله شوال الافرد وابتداء الحديث ... ابو ليث نصر بن محمد بن ابراهيم بن الخطاب السمرقندي رحمه الله تعالى ورضي عنه امين يا رب العالمين في تاريخه عبد ربه تعالى عبد العزيز بن محسن ..."', 'Incipit: [Riyāḍ al-ṣāliḥīn] "الحمد لله ذي الجلال الكبير المتعال وصلى الله على محمد وعلى اله خير صحب وال الحمد لله الذي سقى اولياء من خالص كاس محبته ..." ; [al-Anwār al-muḍīʼah] "الحمد لله الذي نور قلوب اوليائه بانواره وجعلها معدن الحكمة ومحل اسراره ..." ; [Bushrá al-kaʼīb bi-liqāʼ al-ḥabīb] "الحمد لله وكفى وسلام على عباده الذين اصفطى وبعد هذا جزء سميته بشرى الكئيب بلقاء الحبيب لخصته من كتابي الكبير الذي الفته في احوال البزرخ قصرته على البشرى بما يلقاه المؤمن عند موته ..." ; [Tanbīh al-ghāfilīn] "الحمد لله الذي هدينا لكتابه وفضلنا على سائر الامم بكرم انبيائه محمد عليه الصلوة والسلام حمدا يستجاب بالمرجوب من رضاه ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '7. p.319-p.356 : Majmūʻ al-khiṭāb.', '6. p.314-p.318 : [blank].', '5. p.224-p.313 : [Tanbīh al-ghāfilīn] / Abū al-Layth Naṣr ibn Muḥammad al-Samarqandī.', '4. p.205-p.223 : Bushrá al-kaʼīb bi-liqāʼ al-ḥabīb / [al-Suyūṭī].', '3. p.190-p.205 : al-Anwār al-muḍīʼah al-jāmiʻ bayna al-sharīʻah wa-al-ḥaqīqah / ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Muḥammad al-Thaʻālibī.', '2. p.2-p.189 : Riyāḍ al-ṣāliḥīn wa-tuḥfat al-muttaqīn / ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Muḥammad al-Thaʻālibī.', '1. p.1 [originally left blank, now carries purchase statement, excerpts, etc.].', "Fine, composite collection (majmūʻah) of works addressing theological topics with significance for religious practice from the life of the Prophet and various saints, including ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Muḥammad al-Thaʻālibī's (d.1468) Riyāḍ al-ṣāliḥīn wa-tuḥfat al-muttaqīn and al-Anwār al-muḍīʼah al-jāmiʻ bayna al-sharīʻah wa-al-ḥaqīqah, al-Suyūṭī's (d.1505) Bushrá al-kaʼīb bi lughat al-ḥabīb, Abū al-Layth al-Samarqandī's (d.983?) Tanbīh al-ghāfilīn (incomplete), and a collection of sermons with excerpts of ḥadīth, etc. Contributions to the cataloguing from Elizabeth Kunze."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 508', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.117, Risālah fī ʻaqāʼid al-suʼāl ʻan al-īmān copied by Mullā Muḥammad ibn Mullā Aḥmad al-Zand [?] al-Shāfiʻī al-Qādirī with transcription completed 16 Jumādá II [?] 1264 [ca. 20 May 1848]. As appears in colophon on p.134, transcription of al-Waṣīyah [Waṣīyat al-Imām al-Aʻẓam Abī Ḥanīfah] completed Ramaḍān 1274 [April-May 1858]. Other works likely copied around the same time. Ownership / purchase statement with contents listing on p.284 provides rough terminus ante quem for the entire majmūʻah of 1875 or 6.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inscription on inner front cover, "IL 425" and "M. 43" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark purple cloth with red leather over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins (framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in yellow laid paper ; sewn in white thread, four stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and magenta, good condition ; overall in fair condition with only minor abrasion, lifting of leather, staining to board linings, etc.', 'Support: European wove paper and laid paper of at least two types ; opening through p.158 in wove paper ; next and final quires (pp.159-178, 275 to close), flyleaves and board linings in a laid paper (possibly machine laid) with \'laid\' lines more of a mesh / crosshatch, chain lines spaced 25-27 mm. apart (vertical), watermark with stag leaping above pond (stag springing or salient, or even courant) and "B G" ; other gatherings (pp.179-218) in a type with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 24-25 mm. apart (vertical), and watermarks including lion rampant in a coat of arms and eagle with "J V" [?] below (see p.179, etc.) ; latter quires (pp.209-274) in a type with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 25-26 mm. apart (vertical), and "F P" watermark (perhaps Fratelli Palazzuoli, period between initials in shape of triangle).', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; written area surrounded by red double rule-border ; written area of Risālah fī ʻaqāʼid al-suʼāl ʻan al-īmān surrounded by black rule-border ; some overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh and naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) ; several fine hands with Turkish and Persianate features [Iraqi?] ; opening two works in a distinct hand (naskh), following works through Ṣūfic excerpts mainly in one hand (naskh-nastaʻlīq / talik) with some passages supplied in other hands, collection of poetry in still a different hand (naskh).', 'Layout: Written in 23-27 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry ; frame-ruled ; written area divided to two columns to set off verses.', 'Collation: i, 7 V(70), IV (78), 5 V(128), IV (136), IV-2 (142), i ; chiefly quinions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of oblique strokes in the upper-outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; p.82 left partially blank ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: [ Risālah fī al-ʻaqāʼid] "Scribal," triangular, reads "قد تمت النسخة المباركة على يد الفقير ملا محمد بن ملا احمد الزند [؟] الشافعي مذهبا القادري طريقة غفر الله له ولوالديه ولمن نظر بها وقرأ له ولوالديه سورة الفاتحة ١٦ ج سنة ١٢۶٤" ; [Waṣīyat al-Imām al-Aʻẓam] "Scribal," triangular, reads "قد فرغت هذه الوصية في شهر رمضان سنة الف ومائتين واربع وسبعين من [؟] بعد هجرة النبوة على صاحبها افضل الصلاة والسلام"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '20. p.285-p.288 : [blank].', '19. p.284 : [ownership / purchase statements].', '18. p.275-p.283 : [Majmūʻat shiʻr].', '17. p.269-p.274 : [blank].', '15. p.264-p.268 : [excerpts from Ṣūfī works].', '14. p.160-263 : [Fāʼidat raṣd al-ibrah ... etc., i.e. Aḥādīth wa-nuṣūṣ fiqhīyah, fatāwá wa-fawāʼid fiqhīyah].', '13. p.141-159 : Fāʼidah fī khawwāṣ irṣād al-silāḥ wa-shurb al-kaʼs wa-fī fawāʼid al-ṭarīqah al-Rifāʻīyah.', '12. p.135-140: Fāʼidah fī baʻḍ masāʼil min tartīb [?] kalimat al-tawḥīd wa-al-īmān wa-irkānihā.', '11. p.134 : ʻAdad ḥurūf al-Qurʼān manqūl min Bustān al-ʻārifīn min muṣannafāt Abī al-Layth.', '10. p.130-p.134 : Waṣīyat al-Imām al-Aʻẓam Abī Ḥanīfah Nuʻmān ibn Thābit / Abū Ḥanīfah.', '9. p.127-p.130 : Yuqraʼ hādhā al-duʻāʼ ʻinda al-nawm.', '8. p.126 : Aʻlamu anna al-kaffārāt al-mashhūrah hādhihi.', '7. p.125 : Jamʻ al-iʻtiqād li-ahl al-sunnah.', '6. p.119-p.125: al-Waṣīyah li-Abī Yūsuf Yaʻqūb / Abū Ḥanīfah.', '5. p.118-p.119 : Hādhihi ʻAqāʼid lil-Ghazālī / al-Ghazālī.', '4. p.107-p.117 : Risālah fī al-ʻaqāʼid al-suʼāl ʻan al-īmān / Abū Isḥāq al-Tūnisī.', '3. p.28-p.106 : ʻUyūn al-ḥaqīqah fī fatāwá al-ṭarīqah [revised and enlarged] /Abū Muḥammad Aḥmad ibn Khamīs ibn ʻAlī al-Rifāʻī al-Baghdādī.', '2. p.4-p.27 : ʻUyūn al-ḥaqīqah fī fatāwá al-ṭarīqah /Aḥmad ibn Khamīs ibn ʻAlī al-Rifāʻī al-Baghdādī.', '1. p.3 : [contents listing].', "Fine collection (majmūʻah) of works and excerpts on various topics of Ṣūfism, articles of faith, fiqh, etc. conluding with a small collection of poetry. Contents listing on 'title page' (p.3)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 923', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.99, transcription of opening work completed 27 Muḥarram 1357, corresponding to 29 March 1938 and 20 Baramhāt [1654]. As appears in colophon on p.125, transcription of second work completed 2 Ṣafar 1357, corresponding to 3 April 1938 and 25 Baramāt 1656 [1654]. Likely copied in Egypt and eventually bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 72', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "شرح الدواني | وشرح مير غياث | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; compact hand in thin to bold line (line thickness varies considerably) ; serifless and freely ligatured with slight effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 26 lines per page.', "Collation: Pages between works left blank with some serving as 'title pages' (see pp.101, 129, 425) ; Pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization ; pagination in black ink and pencil, Hindu-Arabic numerals supplied for most of second work (pp.103-121) ; text of p.145 has been struck through by the copyist and is accompanied by a marginal note in which he explains his error.", 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "قد وقع الفراغ في يوم الثلاثاء الموافق ٢٧ من محرم ١٣٥٧ المطابق ليوم ٢٩ من مارس ١٩٣٨ والمصادف للعشرين من برمهات شهر الخيرات والبركات" ; "Scribal," reads "كمل هذا التلخيص في ثاني صفر الخير ١٣٥٧ ثالث ابريل ١٩٣٨ ٢٥ برمات ١٦٥٦"', "Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', '17. p.487-500 : [excerpts from assorted treatises of Bahmanyār including Mā baʻda al-Ṭabīʻah and Risālah fī Marātib al-mawjūdāt] / Bahmanyār ibn al-Marzubān.', '16. p.470-p.487 : Thālith al-qamarayn sharḥ baytay al-Raqmatayn / [ʻAbd al-Raḥīm ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Suyūṭī].', '15. p.438-p.487 : [Mishkāt al-anwār] / al-Ghazālī.', '14. p.425-p.437 : Hayākil al-nūr / li-Shihāb al-Dīn Abī al-Futūḥ Yaḥyá ibn Ḥabash al-Suhrawardī.', '13. p.422-p.424 : Tanwīr al-afhām sharḥ Tahdhīb al-kalām [excerpt, compare Isl. Ms. 988].', '12. p.356-p.422 : [al-Ḥikmah al-ʻarshīyah] / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Shīrāzī.', '11. p.313-p.356 : Risālat al-Mashāʻir / li-Ṣadr al-Mutaʼallihīn [Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Shīrāzī].', '10. p.209-p.312 : Sharḥ al-Jalāl al-Dawānī ʻalá Hayākil al-nūr / Jalāl a-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Asʻad al-Dawānī.', '9. p.208 : [blank].', '8. p.146-p.207 : [Selection of speeches and letters by ʻAbd al-Bahāʼ ʻAbbās Afandī opening with Khuṭbat ʻAbd al-Bahāʼ fī Kanīsat San Jūrj fī Wastminstar] / ʻAbduʼl-Bahá.', '7. p.145 : [text crossed out by copyist].', '6. p.129-p.144 : Talkhīṣ Kitāb sharḥ al-iṣṭilāḥāt al-ʻirfānīyah [appears to be a second, longer attempt at the preceding abrigdment].', '5. p.128 : [blank].', '4. p.126-p.127 : Min Talkhīṣ li-kitāb ākhar fī al-iṣṭilāḥāt.', '3. p.101-p.125 : [Iṣṭilāḥāt al-Ṣūfīyah, or Sullam al-wuṣūl talkhīṣ Jāmiʻ al-uṣūl] / ʻAbd al-Razzāq al-Qāshānī.', '2. p.100 : [blank].', '1. p.2-p.99 : Sharḥ al-Dawānī wa-Sharḥ Mīr Ghiyāth ʻalá al-Hayākil / Muḥammad ibn Asʻad al-Dawānī and Ghiyāth al-Dīn Manṣūr Dashtakī Shīrāzī.', "Careful copy of a collection (majmūʻah) of mainly philosophical and Ṣūfistic texts opening with excerpts from the commentaries by Jalāl al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Asʻad al-Dawānī (d.1502 or 3) and Ghiyāth al-Dīn Manṣūr Dashtakī Shīrāzī (d.1542) on Shihāb al-Dīn Yaḥyá ibn Ḥabash al-Suhrawardī's (d.1191) Hayākil al-nūr."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 908 v.1', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 57', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title, owner, and decorative accents over raised bands "الاسفار | 1 | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine but appears to be over cords, in white thread, five stations ; stuck-on endbands ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper of at least two different types.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, modern hand in a medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of inclination to the right, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots ; partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 26 lines per page.', 'Collation: Pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد على اله وصحابته اجمعين اما بعد فهذه شذرات ذهبية من الموسوعة التي وضعها خاتمة المحققين ... المعروف بصدر الدين رحمه الله ورضي عنه امين من كتاب الاسفار الاربعة لملا صدرا فصل اعلم ان الوجود متصور بداهة لان علم كل احد بانه موجود ضروري وبداهة العلم بالخاص تستلزم بداهة العلم بالعام ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '24. p.682-p.752 : فصل في غريب كلامه', '23. p.651-p.682 : الحكم السنية', '22. p.588-p.650 : نهج البلاغة', '21. p.477-p.587 : ومن خطبة له بعد', '20. p.474-p.476 : [blank].', '19. p.473 : موجز من الشرح لهذه الخطبة', '18. p.469-p.473 : خطبة الامير المؤمنين', '17. p.457-p.469 : رسالة الحكمة المشرقة وهي عبارة عن تلخيص رسالة حي بن يقظان', '16. p.427-p.457 : الزهد المراد لذاته', '15. p.425-p.426 : [blank].', '14. p.353-p.424 : روضة الطالبين وعمدة السالكين', '13. p.343-p.352 : رسالة عيون المسائل', '12. p.337-p.343 : رسالة آداب طالب حكمة', '11. p.333-p.337 : هذه مقالة شريفة في الابانة عن جوامع', '10. p.327-p.333 : مختصر رسالة المقامات والمواطن لعلامة العامل الشيخ يوسف الهندي الامين', '9. p.309-p.327 : هذه رسالة تدعى ثالث القمرين شرح بيتي الرقمتين الشهيرين', '8. p.300-p.309 : شذرة من كتاب الخطابة الاريسطي بقلم ابي الوليد بن رشد', '7. p.288-p.300 : هذه رسالة ما بعد الطبيعة لبهمنيار بن المرزبان احد تلاميذ الشيخ الرئيس ابي علي بن سينا الملقب بالمعلم الثالث', '6. p.254-p.287 : هذه بقية النبذة التي لخصناها من الاسفار الصدرية', '5. p.223-p.253 : شذور ذهبية من تاريخ الفلاسفة الاقدمين', '4. p.130-p.223 : كتاب النفس الفن الثاني', '3. p.105-p.130 : هذه شذور ذهبية يتلخص فيها نبذ من الهيات كتاب الشفاء للشيخ الرئيس', '2. p.53-p.104 : وهذا ملخص كتاب من اعاظم الكتب الصدرية وهو كتاب المبدأ والمعاد', '1. p.2-p.53 : هذه القطعة التي لخصناها من الاسفار الاربعة الصدرية', 'Careful copy of a vast majmūʻah of excerpts from numerous philosophical works, many of them abridged, presumably by the copyist.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 995', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 144', 'Binding: Boards covered in textured black cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "معتقدات الهائية [كذا، اي البهائية]" ; sewing in white thread, apparently over three recessed cords, tightly bound ; overall in fairly good condition, with boards curving around text block at fore edge.', 'Support: Machine wove paper of three main types ; opening work (through p.192) in a sturdy type, cream in color ; opening section of following collection in another sturdy type, beige in color, ruled in blue, edges in red ; concluding section of collection in still another type, dark cream to beige in color, thin though sturdy.', 'Decoration: Headings and keywords rubricated in opening work ; large passages of texts in majmūʻah (from p.192) executed entirely in red or pinkish red ink, elsewhere only headings rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh and ruqʻah ; opening work in an elegant modern naskh in a medium line, partially but irregularly seriffed with effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, many open counters, pointing in conjoined dots, final yāʼ usually left unpointed ; following collection (majmūʻah) of works (from p.192 on) mainly in ruqʻah, a quick, compact hand in a medium line , serifless and freely ligatured with effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed ; final works of collection in naskh similar to that in the opening work.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 12-15, 21 and 31 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 12 IV(96), VIII (112), VIII+1 (129), VIII (145), 2 VI(169), i ; opening gatherings (carrying Bahai tracts) exclusively quaternions, opening section of following collection in octonions and concluding section in senions ; pages between sections of text occasionally left blank (see pp.268-269) ; quire numbering in purple pencil, black ink or red ink in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals accompanying letter ك just below the end of the final line of the opening recto of each quire in the opening section of Bahai tracts ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (opening section) ; pagination in red ink or pencil, Hindu-Arabic numerals (final works, from p.291) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (referenced in description).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '14. p.317-p.337 : Matn al-Fuṣūṣ / al-Fārābī.', '13. p.309-p.316 : Hādhihi Risālat ʻUyūn al-masāʼil / al-Fārābī.', '12. p.303-p.308 : Risālat ādāb ṭālib al-ḥikmah, aw Risālat Mā yanbaghī an yuqaddamu qabla taʻallum al-falsafah / al-Fārābī.', '11. p.299-p.303 : Maqālah sharīfah fī al-ibānah ʻan jawāmiʻ maḍāmīn Kitāb al-Muʻallim al-Awwal al-mawsūm bi-al-Ḥurūf wa-bi-Kitāb Mā baʻda al-ṭabīʻah wa-al-kashf ʻan aqsāmih wa-ʻan aghrāḍ kull qism / al-Fārābī.', '10. p.291-p.298 : [on eight treatises of al-Fārābī that appeared in print in 1325, i.e. 1907 or 8].', '9. p.282-p.290 : Min Miṣbāḥ al-uns sharḥ Miftāḥ al-ghayb / Muḥammad ibn Ḥamzah al-Fanārī.', '8. p.280-p.281 : Fuṣūl min Miftāḥ al-ghayb / Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Qūnawī.', '7. p.279 : [blank].', '6. p.260-p.278 : Fuṣūl min Sharḥ naẓm al-Tāʼīyah al-Kubrá al-Fāriḍīyah.', '5. p.258-p.259 : [blank].', '4. p.218-p.257 : Risālah fī al-Ḥashr / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī.', '3. p.194-p.217 : Risālat al-Nuqṭah / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī.', "2. p.193 : ['title page' with contents listing for following majmūʻah].", '1. p.1-p.192 : Muʻtaqadāt al-Bābīyah wa-al-Bahāʼīyah / Mīrzā ʻAbbās al-Bahāʼ.', 'Composite collection (majmūʻah) of several works opening with tracts on the Bahai faith and followed by extracts from several philosophical treatises by Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī (d.1641), Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Qūnawī (d.1273 or 4), Muḥammad ibn Ḥamzah al-Fanārī (d.1430 or 31) and al-Fārābī (d.950).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 231', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; decoration and calligraphy reminiscent of the Timurid style characteristic of late 15th century Herat ; paper would also suggest late 15th or possibly early 16th century ; binding would suggest 16th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "224 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on interior of upper cover ; "196" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in lined paper pasted over brown leather doublures, likely with leather filigree appliqué, see interior of envelop flap ; upper and lower covers carry large gold-stamped panel stamp (repeated twice to fill the entire area) filled with symmetrical vegetal design incorporating chi clouds, as well as border in a series of lozenge- and rosette-shaped stamps with outermost series of tooled s-shapes ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; overall in somewhat poor condition with lifting and losses of leather, abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and sporadic chain lines mainly visible only in short lengths ; thick and sturdy though crisp ; well-sized and burnished ; machine laid paper stabilizing opening leaf carries an embossed mark (or "imitation watermark") reads "اثر جديد عهد همايون".', 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2, consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying sūrah heading in white and defined by looping white banding (with black crosses) on grounds of gold and lapis lazuli overlaid with swirling vegetal pattern, all bordered in a series of elaborate bands in gold, white, lapis lazuli, black, red, turquoise, etc. ; surmounted by a narrower rectangular panel carrying lozenges filled with delicate vegetal decoration, itself surmounted by an uppermost semi-circular piece (dome) evoking half of an eight-lobed piece (defined by looping white banding) in gold and lapis lazuli with arabesque in turquoise and further swirling vegetal decoration, all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) ; simpler illuminated headpiece consisting of rectangular panel with cartouche carrying the sūrah heading in white on a gold ground flanked by accent pieces in gold and lapis lazuli with swirling vegetal pattern and surrounded by bands of white, gold, blue, red, etc. appears at opening of each sūrah thereafter (p.16, p.28, p.37, and p.43) ; verse dividers in the form of interlace rosettes in gold with black, red, and blue accents appear throughout ; marginal decoration in the form of roundels in blue, green, and gold with "عشر" in white \'Kufic\' script (marking every ten verses, though many effaced), other roundels in gold and blue with "خمس" in white (marking every fifth verse, though many effaced) ; written area throughout surrounded by elaborate frame consisting of a series of narrow bands in gold, light blue, dark brown to red, turquoise, and lapis lazuli ; floral decoration in blue, gold, red, and black reminiscent of the central decorative panel and pendants of a book cover flank the centered lines ; upper, middle, and lower large lines chrysographed (vocalization in black).', 'Script: Fine calligraphic specimen ; elegant Persian hand ; lines in upper and lower panels of each page in muḥaqqaq, line in central panel in thuluth, lines in intermediate panels in naskh, sūrah headings in riqāʻ ; partially seriffed (mainly right-sloping wedge head-serif) ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 9 lines per page with uppermost, middle, and lowermost large lines filling the column width and two sets of three compact lines centered between them ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 3 IV (24) ; exclusively quaternions ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during digitization).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '5. p.43-p.47 : Sūrat al-Nabaʼ.', '4. p.37-p.43 : Sūrat al-Mulk.', '3. p.28-p.36 : Sūrat al-Wāqiʻah.', '2. p.16-p.28 : Sūrat al-Fatḥ.', '1. p.2-p.16 : Sūrat Yāsīn.', 'Elegant copy of a selection of sūrahs (suwar) from the Qurʼān, namely Sūrat Yāsīn (36), Sūrat al-Fatḥ (48), Sūrat al-Wāqiʻah (56), Sūrat al-Mulk (67) and Sūrat al-Nabaʼ (78).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 505', "Origin: As appears in 'colophon' on p.3, transcription (kitābah / كتابة ) of first work begun 26 Jumādá II 968 [ca. 14 March 1561]. As appears in colophon on p.97, transcription of first work completed in 8 Rajab 968 [ca. 25 March 1561] and executed by Burhān al-Dīn ibn Aḥmad ibn Burhān al-Dīn ibn Aḥmad Zayn al-ʻĀbidīn al-Ḥusaynī al-Maʻarrī al-Ḥalabī al-Shāfiʻī al-Aḥmadī al-Shādhilī. As appears in colophon on p.144, transcription of second work completed by the same copyist ten days later, 18 Rajab 968 [ca. 4 April 1561]. As appears in colophon on p.188, transcription of final work completed by same copyist five days later, 23 Rajab 968 [ca. 9 April 1561].", 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and front flyleaf, "M 2" (possibly supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Boards covered with maroon cloth ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in olive green wove paper ; upper and lower covers carry block-pressed design consisting of central medalion in the form of an oval with plumes, banners and scrollwork above and below, along with scrollwork border and cornerpieces ; sewn in white thread, two stations ; overall in fairly good condition though fully detached from the textblock ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 29 mm. apart (horizontal), and anchor in circle watermark with star above and "D" [?] below (see pp.30-31) ; some inclusions, well-sized and burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated (orange-red ink).', "Script: Naskh ; compact, somewhat angular 'Syrian' hand ; serifless and fairly vertical, mainly adhering to baseline though occasional effect of words descending to baseline, pointing in distinct dots or strokes, mainly closed counters, elongation of horizontal strokes and some descenders (particularly rāʼ, wāw, etc. in rectilinear fashion).", 'Layout: Written in 20-21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V-1 (9), 4 V(49), II+1 (54), 3 V(84), V-1 (93), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.144-p.188 : Shifāʼ al-ṣudūr wa-marātib al-ḥuḍūr, wa-fī nuskhah tusammá Bayān ḥaqīqat al-wuqūf ʻalá asrār al-ḥurūf / Abū al-ʻAbbās Aḥmad ibn ʻAlī al-Būnī.', '3. p.101-p.143 : Kitāb al-Qawānīn, wa-huwa Sharḥ Maḥāsin al-majālis / Abū Isḥāq al-Andalusī al-Mursī al-maʻrūf bi-Ibn al-Marʼah.', '2. p.98-p.100 : [assorted excerpts including adʻaīyah attributed to al-Shādhilī, verses, etc.].', '1. p.3-p.97 : Kitāb fī al-ṭarīqah / Abū al-Ḥasan ʻAlī ibn ʻAbd Allāh al-Shādhilī.', "A collection (majmūʻah / mecmua) of three mystical works copied together in succession by the same copyist including: Kitāb fī al-ṭarīqah (or al-Ṭarīq al-ḥamīd ilá Allāh) a Ṣūfī work attributed to al-Shādhilī (d.1258), followed by Kitāb al-Qawānīn or Sharḥ Maḥāsin al-majālis, a commentary attributed to Abū Isḥāq Ibrāhīm ibn Yūsuf al-Awsī al-Andalusī al-Mursī al-maʻrūf bi-Ibn al-Marʼah upon the celebrated Ṣūfī Ibn al-ʻArīf's (d.1141) Maḥāsin al-majālis, and closing with Shifāʼ al-ṣudūr wa-marātib al-ḥuḍūr or Bayān ḥaqīqat al-wuqūf ʻalá asrār al-ḥurūf a work on mysticism and the science of letters (ʻilm al-ḥurūf) attributed to Abū al-ʻAbbās Aḥmad ibn ʻAlī al-Būnī (d.1225)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 865', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.73, transcription [and composition ?] completed 17 Jumādá I 1219 [ca. 24 August 1804]. As appears in opening matter on p.25, date of composition appears to be represented by a chronogram, the value of which has been entered as ۱۲۱۹ below "جادۀ آخرت" (which would actually seem to have a value of 1214 or 1216). Paper, etc. do suggest 19th century for date of transcription.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip of paper with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Meredith-Owens notes" (pp.1-2) -- b. Slip of paper with note "counted for 1968/69 Annual Report\' (pp.3-4) -- c. Slip of paper with notes describing contents in hand of G. Meredith-Owens "MO 13 Manāzil al-ḥajj | copied in 1219 (The date of composition)" (pp.5-6).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 14', 'Binding: Boards covered in mauve paper (blotched design evoking marbling) with red-brown leather over spine and board corners (half binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted laid paper ; head edge of text block gilt ; spine gold-stamped with title "MS. | MANĀZILU L-HADJ̲DJ̲" ; sewn in white thread over four recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands in green, red and white stripes ; overall in good condition ; original cover material has been bound in (see pp.11-12, etc. and note on upper pastedown).', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat indistinct, some curving) and chain lines faintly visible, cloudy formation, quite sturdy, dark cream in color, well-burnished ; some pest damage.', 'Decoration: Keywords rubricated or overlined in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; large, elegant hand ; serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline, some elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page.', 'Collation: ii, ii, 3 IV(24), III (30), 2 II(38), ii, ii ; chiefly quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of black strokes, upper outer corner of right-hand leaf, lower outer corner of left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; foliation in greyish black ink, Western numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts, flyleaves and added leaves).', 'Colophon: "تمت تمام شد کتاب منازل الحج و بتاریخ هفدهم جمادی الاول سنه ۱۲۱۹ هجری از تحریر فراغ یافت"', 'Explicit: "این حروف باین جهت بشرح آنها نپرداخت"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذى جعل منازل الحج وسيله للشهود واكرم الحجاج من سائر قافله الوجود الذى انزل فى شان الكعبه ... اما بعد بر ارباب الباب مخفى و محتجب ...که سیاح بلاد باصلاح و سداد خیر ... عبارت ازام القری مکه و حجاز و بطحی باشد "', 'Title from opening matter (p.25).', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the author's account of his pilgrimage from Baghdad to Mecca and Medina as well as holy sites in Iraq (see in al-Dharīʻah, no.6893 v.22 p.245)."])

en: (count: ['Illuminated ʻunwān on p. [1]; on pp. [1-2], phrase endings marked with gold dots; subsequently, red dots are used; text rubricated and enclosed in gold borders; marginal notes in another hand; citations identified in red in margins.', 'Commentary on Koran sūrah XXI, al-Anbiyāʾ (The Prophets), verses 1 and 2. The discussion includes references to the works of many major Koranic commentators.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 528', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; perhaps mid to late 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. (pp.1-2)-- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and label on lower cover, "IL 374" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in a decorative paper (blue flecked with orange, red, white, etc.) with brown leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in dark pink or light brown, fair condition ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion and staining.', 'Support: European laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (vertical), and three crescents watermark (65 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.8, etc.) ; sturdy and thick ; very lightly burnished if so.', "Script: Naskh ; clear Turkish or 'Syrian' hand in a medium line ; partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on occasional free-standing alif and shaqq of kāf, slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, rounded with curvilinear descenders, freely ligatured, kāf mashqūqah preferred with shaqq often sweeping up dramatically (and seriffed), pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots (alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ), occasional elongation of horizontal strokes.", 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 5 V(50) ; exclusively quinions ; final five leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Explicit: "الاحاديث والاخبار التي تكفلت بجمعها اهل الحديث وفي هذا الميدان وقف قلم البيان والحمد لله اولا واخرا وظاهرا وباطنا وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى جميع الانبياء والمرسلين والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين وبعد فيقول افقر الورى واقل الخدم ... مصطفى بن كمال الدين بن علي الصديقي الخلوتي غفر الله له كل زله ... اعلم ايها الطالب المريد وفقك الله لطلب المزيد ان من اللازم عليك بعد اخذ الطريق ان كنت ممن اخذه للسير والسلوك في منهل اهل التحقيق لا للتبرك والالتماس كما عليه كثير من الناس معرفة ما لا بد منه من صلوات الطريق واوراده ... احببت ان اشرح في هذه الكراسة بعض ما هنالك ليبني عليها الطالب اساسه وسميتها المنهل العذب السائغ لوراده في ذكر صلوات الطريق واوراده ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.5) and opening (p.6).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of a mystical treatise with instructions for prayer by Muṣṭafá ibn Kamāl al-Dīn ibn ʻAlī al-Ṣaddīqī al-Khalwatī al-Bakrī (d.1749).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 279', 'Origin: Date below vase with large floral spray 1281 [1864 or 5] ; other features also suggest 19th century. As appears in opening text, possibly executed for the Ottoman statesman Mehmet Fuat Paşa (d.1869).', 'Former shelfmark: "598 [?]" inscribed in pencil on verso of \'front\' flyleaf ; "123" inscribed in pencil on recto of \'back\' flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark green straight-grain leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in a streaked paper (in yellow, dark purple, etc. reminiscent of tree-marbling or stream marbling) ; upper and lower covers carry gold-stamped central vegetal pendant, corner accents and vegetal border ; sewn in red thread, four stations, failed ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: Paper of written area embossed to carry text and figurative designs, set in surface-dyed frames of bright green and mounted on pasteboards.', 'Decoration: Embossed borders (reminiscent of mountains) as well as vegetal and figurative designs with such animals as lions, dragons, stags, bulls, etc. accenting the calligraphy or filling a page.', 'Script: Mainly nastaʻlīq with occasional thuluth ; exquisite calligraphic hand executed with the fingernail or stylus in the technique known as khaṭṭ-i nākhunī ( خط ناخنی / khaṭṭ-e nākhonī). Compare no. 1-85-154.63 at the Library of Congress and see description provided by Christiane Gruber in Selections of Arabic, Persian, and Ottoman Calligraphy (available online).', 'Layout: Varies widely, pages carrying text with mainly 6-8 lines per page ; many pages carrying figurative or vegetal decoration only.', "Collation: Seven 'panels' (mounted leaves) hinged together with blue textile.", 'Explicit: "ایا چرخ در پیش قدر تو واله ... تویی آنکه بر درگهت چرخ دربان كتبه ابو تراب افتاده"', 'Incipit: "مديح سپهر رفعت بحر و قار و كدهي يكانه كوهر بحر كرم فؤاد پاشا ... "', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Superb album of calligraphy (muraqqaʻ or murakkâ) employing verses of Anvari, etc. with interspersed figurative illustrations of lions, dragons, stags, bulls, etc. as well as vegetal motifs, all embossed in white paper likely with the fingernail, a technique known as khaṭṭ-i nākhunī ( خط ناخنی / khaṭṭ-e nākhonī). Contributions to the description from Ulrich Marzolph and Emily Neumeier.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 924', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.114, transcription of the second gathering (kurrāsah) of the second work (an abridgment of Hegel in Arabic) completed 15 December 1937 corresponding to 12 Shawwāl 1356 and 6 Kiyāk [1654]. Likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 73', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "منطق هيجل | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; compact hand, initially carefully executed in a bold line, later much quicker in a finer line ; serifless and freely ligatured with slight effect of inclination toward the right, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 25 lines per page.', "Collation: Pages between sections within works left blank, some serving as 'title pages' (see pp.81, 135, 155, 187, 207, 227, 303, 343) ; pagination in lavender pencil and black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (through p.60) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Colophon: [Manṭiq Jūrj Wīlhām Farīdrīkh Hayjal] "Scribal," reads "انتهى هذا الملخص من المنطق الهيجلي وقد وقع الفراغ منه في يوم الاربعاء الموافق للخامس عشر من ديسمبر ١٩٣٧ وللثاني عشر من شوال ١٣٥٦ وللسادس من كياك"', 'Title from rubricated heading on incipit page (p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', '8. p.247-p.366 : Kitāb Mā baʻda al-ṭabīʻah wa-huwa al-qism al-rābiʻ min Talkhīṣ Maqālāt Arīsṭū / li-Abī al-Walīd Muḥammad ibn Rushd.', '7. p.167-p.246 : al-Falsafah al-ʻaṣrīyah min Tārīkh Bāks.', '6. p.166 : [blank].', '5. p.159-p.165 : Nubdhah fī Mujmal al-taṭawwur min Kānt ilá Hayjal.', '4. p.158 : [blank].', '3. p.115-p.157 : Hayjal.', '2. p.61-p.114 : Manṭiq Jūrj Wīlhām Farīdrīkh Hayjal / Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel.', '1. p.2-p.60 : Manṭiq Hayjal / Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel.', "Careful copy of a collection (majmūʻah) of philosophical works, opening with an abridged Arabic translation of Hegel's Logic (Wissenschaft der Logik), followed by another abridged Arabic translation of Hegel's Logic in two sections, followed by a work on Hegel's life and thought in three sections, followed by a summary of philosophical developments from Kant to Hegel, followed by a section on modern philosophy from Bax’s Handbook on the history of philosophy in four sections, and concluding with Ibn Rushd's (Averroës) celebrated shorter commentary on Aristotle's Metaphysics in three sections."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 967', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 116', 'Binding: Boards covered in black textured cloth ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a geometric pattern (resembling a scale pattern) in dull gold ; cover gold-stamped with "حكمة الاشراق" ; sewn in heavy white thread over two recessed cords ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion at board edges.', 'Support: Machine laid and wove paper ; opening type (pp.3-42) machine laid, sturdy, dark cream to beige in color ; final type machine wove, sturdy, dark cream in color.', 'Decoration: Text of opening two sections executed entirely in red ink.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; careful, compact modern hand initially in a medium to bold line, in final section in a thinner line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 12-14 lines per page.', "Collation: ii, 2 V(20), IV (28), II (32), ii ; pages between sections (corresponding to gatherings) left blank, some serving as 'title pages' (see pp.23, 43, 59) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, presumably supplied during digitization (includes inner flyleaves).", 'Explicit: "والضوابط القليلة الجامعة خير من الكثرة المحوجة الى تكلفات واعتذارات واهبة تم المنطق"', 'Incipit: "جل ذكرك اللهم وعظم قدسك وعز جارك وعلت سبحانك وتعالى جهدك ... وبعد اعلموا اخواني ان كثرة اقتراحكم في تحرير حكمة الاشراق اوهنت عزمي في الامتناع وازالت ميلي الى الاضراب عن الاسعاف ..."', "Title from 'title pages' at openings of each section (pp.3, 23, 43, 59).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful though incomplete copy of the first part (al-Qism al-awwal) of Ḥikmat al-ishrāq, the widely-known text on the philosophy of illumination by Shihāb al-Dīn Yaḥyá ibn Ḥabash al-Suhrawardī (d.1191), ending with the conclusion of al-Faṣl al-thānī of al-Maqālah al-thālithah (see p.42 of the Walbridge and Ziai edition).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 640', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.54, transcription completed 13 Rajab 1144 [ca. 11 January 1732].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and label on lower cover "IL 371" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards (quite thin) covered in block-printed paper (repeating olive wreath motif in black with floral accents in white on a teal ground) with spine in red leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; sewing now gone ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, staining, lifting of paper, etc. ; likely never attached to this textblock, serves as wrapper.', 'Support: European laid paper of at least two types ; one type with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23 mm. apart (horizontal), and grapes (raisin) under crown watermark (see p.44, 53, etc.) ; another type with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23 mm. apart (horizontal), and no watermarks visible ; all medium cream in color, sturdy and well-burnished ; some staining.', 'Decoration: Textual dividers in the form of red hāʼ.', "Script: Naskh ; clear Turkish (Eastern Anatolian) or 'Syrian' hand ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, mainly curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in distinct dots (some conjoined), elongation of horizontal strokes, final yāʼ often unpointed, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf), point of final nūn set deep in bowl.", 'Layout: Written in 30 lines per page (alternating two lines of two hemistiches per line with single centered hemistich per line) ; stanzas of the takhmīs for each bayt of the ʻAynīyah arranged such that the opening line carries the first two added hemistiches, the next line carries the third added hemistich and first hemistich of the bayt, and the third line (centered) carries the second hemistich of the bayt.', 'Collation: 2 V(20), IV (28) ; two quinions and a quaternion ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "وقد تم تخميس العينية المسمى بمنظوم عقود قلائد الدر النفيس في سر معنى التثليث والتخميس بحمد الله وذلك يوم الخميس ثالث عشر من رجب سنه الف ومائة واربعه واربعين سنه ۱۱٤٤ امين تم"', 'Explicit: "وكل كمال فهو منه لقد نما وفاض على كل الوجود بماهما فلله من مولى سما فوق كلما عليه سلام الله مني وانما سلامي على نفسي النفيسة واقع"', 'Incipit: "بافق سما الذات تجلي المطالع ويبدو لنا منها بدور طوالع وفيها لقلب القلب يا من يطالع فؤاد به شمس المحبة طالع فليس لنجم الغير [العذل] فيه مواقع"', "Title from 'title page' inscription (p.1) and colophon on p.54.", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the takhmīs (amplification) by Abū al-Fatḥ Sirḥān al-Samarjī al-Sharnūbī upon al-Nawādir al-ʻaynīyah fī al-bawādir al-ghaybīyah, or al-ʻAynīyah, a ṣūfī qaṣīdah in ʻayn by al-Shaykh ʻAbd al-Karīm al-Jīlī (d.1428). Excerpts on 'title page' and final leaf (pp.55-56). Perhaps once part of a larger collected volume (majmūʻah)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 964', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 113', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "مقالة في النفس ابن العبري | J.H.D." ; sewn in white thread, difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper.', 'Decoration: Opening heading rubricated.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 17-24 lines per page.', 'Collation: One page between sections (p.18) left blank ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "وتلك الاشرار آفتهم وشقاوتهم وعثرتهم وسقطتهم اعاذنا الله وحفظنا بعين عنايته ... وله الحمد والمجد وله النعمة والفضل في المبدا والمعاد والاولى والاخرى ومنه حسن الختام في الكمال والاتمام آمين"', 'Incipit: [transcription with contribution from Luke Yarbrough] "بسم الله خير الاسماء الحمد لله الذي ابدع الوجود بعد العدم ونفى بذلك عما سواه الازلية والقدم ...وبعد فهذا مقال مختصر وقول وجيز في علم النفس الانسانية لم نذكر فيه الا المهم من دواعي المطلوب ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of a concise treatise on the soul by Ibn al-ʻIbrī (d.1286).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 886', "Origin: As appears in colophon on p.614, copied by ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʻAbd Allāh on the order of Mīr ʻAbd al-Salām ( مير عبد السلام ) with transcription completed 2 Muḥarram in year 38 of Awrangzīb's reign, i.e. regnal year of Awrangzīb (r.1068–1118/1658–1707), that is Hijrī year 1106 [ca. 23 August 1694].", 'Accompanying materials: a. Scrap with inscription in ink "Niẓāmī MS. of Khamsa 1697" (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Recycled card with notes in hand of Emilie Savage-Smith [?] "Medallion – found at beginning or end, usually contain title – do not use term ʻunwān | Persian poetry - Indian poet, but not Indian ms. | some signatures at end bd. in upside down | 17th c." (paginated pp.3-4) -- c. Slip with note "Persian Manuscripts (Heyworth-Dunne?) No Husselman or Meredith-Owen notes" (paginated pp.5-6) -- d. Slip with note in Arabic on prayer obligation (paginated pp.437-438).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 35', 'Binding: Boards covered in a mottled paper (resembling effect of marble calf / mottled calf / tree calf) in brown with light brown leather over spine and board corners (half binding) ; Western style binding (tight back) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted European laid paper ; edges of text block stained blue ; now sewn over five recessed cords ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion, lifting and losses of leather and paper, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper mainly with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (mainly vertical, somewhat indistinct, some curving) and occasional chain lines visible, cloudy formation, sturdy, lightly burnished, dark cream to beige in color ; pastedowns and flyleaves in European laid paper with scrollwork (tree form above and shield at center) and "D & C BLAUW" watermarks ; some staining ; repairs (fills).', "Decoration: Elegant illuminated titlepiece on 'title page' (p.9) consisting of medallion with central cartouche and roundels carrying the title, author and contents in blue ink on fields of gold, set among fine floral vegetal decoration in gold, red-orange, pink, white, etc. on fields of black and blue, set off by decorative bands in white, gold, blue, green and lavender and radiating stalks (tīgh) ; superb illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of each section (p.10, 64, 204, 300, 398, 555) mainly consisting of rectangular pieces, opening headpiece on p.10 consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by gold pendants overlaid with swirling floral vegetal decoration in gold, red-orange, pink, green, light blue, white, etc. set in fields of blue, surmounted by rectangular piece evoking a row of scalloped domes filled with similar floral vegetal design on fields of gold and blue, all set in a well of red, green and blue and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) ; accenting text on p.486, similar floral motifs to that appearing in headpieces ; written area surrounded by frame in gold band with outermost red and blue fillets, divisions within defined by narrow gold bands outlined in black fillets ; headings chrysographed, rubricated or in blue ink.", 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand in a thin line ; serifless with effect of words descending to baseline and inclining to the right, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing (two and three dots) mainly in distinct dots ; section headings in tawqīʻ (mainly serifless).', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page, with written area divided to four columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 10 IV(80), III (86), 5 IV(126), III+I+I (136), V+1 (147), 5 IV(187), III (193), 6 IV(241), III (247), 5 IV(287), III (293), ii ; chiefly quaternions with occasional ternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of short strokes in black ink in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf and lower-outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; tissue weight leaves inserted to protect illuminated decoration (not paginated) ; seven gatherings before the last bound in upside down (pp.497-604) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and inner flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "بتاریخ دویم شهر محرم الحرام سنه سی و هشت جلوس میمنت مانوس محمد اورنگ زیب بادشاه عالم گیر خلد الله ملکه و سلطنته و مطابق سنه هجری مقدس یکهزار و صد و شش کاتب المذنب محتاج الغفران عبد الرحمن ابن عبد الله حسب الفرموده صاحب و الاجاه ذوی المجد و الکرام مفخر الانام میر عبد السلام مد الله تعالی ظل اقباله و عمه نواله الی یوم القیامه کتاب اقبال نامه فی حصن حصین و حصار متین ... نمود تمت بالخیر تم"', 'Explicit: "از اغاز او تا با نجام او تمت الکتاب بعون ملك الوهاب تم"', 'Incipit: "بسم الله الرحمن الرحیم هست کلید در گنج حکیم ..."', "Title from illuminated titlepiece on 'title page' (p.9).", 'Ms. codex.', "Exquisite copy of Niẓāmī’s Khamsah (quintet) with Makhzan al-asrār, Khusraw va Shīrīn, Laylá (Laylī) va Majnūn, Haft Paykar, and Iskandarʹnāmah (Sharafʹnāmah and Iqbālʹnāmah, in titlepiece on 'title page' (p.9) distinguished as Iskandarʹnāmah and Iqbālʹnāmah)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 863', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.474, copied by Amīn al-Dīn Muḥammad al-Samarqandī al-Ḥanafī with transcription completed 1 Shaʻbān 863 [ca. 3 June 1459].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Strip of paper with "#7" in red pencil -- b. Recycled catalog card with note in pencil "early ms. worth investigating" -- c. Slip of paper with notes in handwriting of E. M. Hussleman "Ḳasīm ibn ʻAlī, Abu Muḥammad, called al-Harīrī. Maḳāmāt. Copied A.H. 863 = AD1458 | cf. Mich. MS. Isl. 3rd lot numbered 148 | 237 ff 472 pp.-- d. Slip of ledger paper with notes in French giving inventory number "Livre no 2" and characterizing contents (title, author, copyist, date of transcription, script, dimensions, and extent), on reverse a few words in crude Arabic -- e. Slip of paper with inscription in ink "Counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" -- f. Slip of paper with inscription in ink "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) Husselman notes" -- g. Page with list of titles torn from a seller\'s catalogue (Librairie Maisonneuve Frères, éditeurs | 3, rue du Sabot, Paris VIe) inscribed "May 1930" and entry for this manuscript "324. HARIRI (Aboû Mohammed al-Gâsim ibn Ali al-Hariri). Les Maqâmât, ou les différentes formes du style arabe. In-4 rel. 350 fr. Manuscrit d\'une magnifique calligraphie persane. Copié par Amin ed Din el Molla Samarkandi, le dimanche 1er Chaâkan 863 de l\'Hégire (1458 J.-Ch.) et exécuté probablement en Perse. - Hauteur, 26 cm. 1/2; largeur, 18 cm. - 238 ff. - Tache d\'eau et la reliure est détériorée."', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 12 ; "No. 3" from upper cover label.', "Binding: Pasteboards covered in a dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; board linings in untinted paper ; upper and lower covers carry four-lobed or petalled central ornament built up of a repeated stamp, as well as elegant blind-tooled borders in a series of square stamps filled with vegetal interlace designs defined by blind rules ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; endbands damaged with significant losses at head and tail though traces of blue thread, core of headband, and primaries remain (clearly stitched through textile spine lining) ; overall in poor condition with flap lost, much abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, pest damage, etc. ; recycled paper (manuscript 'waste') used in pasteboards ; repair to spine (rebacked) in dark brown leather, also damaged ; housed in box for protection.", "Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines grouped in threes with 11-12 mm. between chains and roughly 44 mm. between groups (see p.182, etc.), thick and sturdy, medium cream in color, well-burnished ; replacement leaves carrying pp.19-22 in European laid paper with bull's head watermark (with snake on cross pole above) ; back flyleaf in European laid paper with hand (six petalled flower above) watermark ; some pest damage ; repairs.", 'Decoration: Section headings and many glosses rubricated, a few in now light brown ink (see p.27, etc.) ; written area of incipit page surrounded by double rule-border (in black ink), elsewhere written area surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant hand ; partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on occasional lām, even free-standing alif, slight effect of tilt to the left, elongation of horizontal strokes, curvilinear descenders, mainly open counters, pointing in distinct dots, kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred with shaqq even on final kāf, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V+1 (11), V (21), VI (33), V+1 (44), V-1 (53), 11 V(163), IV (171), 4 V(211), V-2 (219), 2 V-1(237), i ; chiefly quinions ; leaves left partially blank at opening of virtually each maqāmah ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes back flyleaf).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "قد وقع الفراغ من تحرير هذه النسخة الشريفة اللطيفة على يد العبد الفقير الراجي لطف ربه الخفي امين الدين محمد السمرقندي الحنفي في يوم الاحد الاول من شهر شعبان عامة ثلاث وستين وثمانمائة"', 'Explicit: "ويخطي بالعفو انه هو اهل التقوى واهل المغفرة وولي الخيرات في الدنيا والاخرة تمت المقامات بحمد الله ومنه وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله ورضي الله عن كل الصحابة اجمعين"', 'Incipit: "اللهم انا نحمدك على ما علمت من البيان والهمت من التبيان كما نحمدك على ما [اسبغت] من العطا واسبلت من الغطاء ..."', 'Title from close on p.473.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of al-Ḥarīrī’s (d.1122) celebrated Maqāmāt or Sessions modeled after those of al-Hamadhānī (d.1008).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 536', 'Origin: According to colophon on fol.40a, copied ("katabtuhu") in Shīrāz by al-ʻArshī, 746 [1345 or 1346].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda', 'Binding: Covered in blue cloth without boards; Type III (without flap); modern, certainly not original.', 'Support: non-European laid paper; laid lines sometimes run vertically, sometimes horizontally; no chain lines visible; 20 laid lines in 17mm; watermarked European laid paper is used for the substituted leaf at fol.28 as well as for the repairs at the top of fol.40; chain lines spaced roughly 21 mm. apart and running horizontally; watermark may be pot with grapes.', 'Decoration: Text of fol.12a is rubricated.', 'Script: Mainly naskh with elements of taʻlīq; medium Persian hand with words descending onto the baseline, partially pointed and with rare vocalization, somewhat difficult to read; fol.21 and fol.28 are in a small, neat Persian naskh.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page except for the inserted folia (fol. 21 and fol. 28) which range from 23-26 lines per page.', 'Collation: iv, 4 V (40) ; chiefly quinions; catchwords present; pagination added later in pencil, Western numerals.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "كتبته بشيراز سنة 746 العرشي غفر الله له"', 'Explicit: "والفطنة والذكاء يشعر [كذا] بسرعة الادراك [؟] لما غاب عن المدرك والمعرفة قد [كذا] سبق نكرة فلا يمنع عن اطلاق شيء منه الا شيء مما ذكرناه فان حقق لفظ لا يوهم اصلا بين المتفاهمين ولم يرد الشرع بالمنع منه فانا نجوز اطلاقه قطعا والله اعلم بالصواب"', 'Incipit: "قال الشيخ الامام حجة الاسلام ابو حامد محمد بن محمد بن محمد الغزالي نعمة الله ورضوانه عليه فالحمد لله المتفرد بكبريائه وعظمته المتوحد بتعاليه وصمديته الذي قصر اجنحة العقول ... بعد فقد سألني اخ في الله يعين [؟] في الدين اجابته شرح معاني اسماء الله الحسنى ..."', 'Title from recto of first flyleaf.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Treatise on the divine attributes, or ninety-nine names of God, and whether men may imitate them. Description provided by Noah Gardiner.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 476', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.382, copied by Muḥammad ibn ʻAlī al-Zardanāwī [?] with transcription completed 11 Rajab 1142 [ca. 30 January 1730].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, "IL 360" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in very dark brown to black leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in yellow-tinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped lozenge-shaped pendant (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OSh 1) along with tooled rule border ; sewn in cream thread, four stations ; worked endbands in cream, headband in good condition, tailband gone ; overall in somewhat poor condition with upper cover fully detached, lifting and losses of leather at fore edge flap, abrasion, staining, some negative draw in upper cover, minor delamination of board in fore edge flap, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm., chain lines spaced 19 mm. apart, and cartouche with "A D [?]" above grapes (raisin) watermark (see p.10, 11, 30, 31, etc.) ; quite well-burnished to glossy, crisp, thin and transluscent though sturdy ; some ink burn.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated.', "Script: Naskh ; clear, medium 'Syrian' or Turkish [?] hand ; seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on most ascenders (including free-standing alif), slight effect of tilt to the left, rounded with curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.", 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 19 V(190), I (192) ; almost exclusively quinions ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "وكان الفراغ منه صبحية يوم الاثنين في اا عشر يوما حلول من رجب سنه ۱۱۴۲ وذلك على يد محمد ابن علي الزردناوي [؟] اللهم اغفر له ولوالديه ولمشايخه ولاخوانه في الله تعالى ولكل المسلمين اجمعين امين امين امين"', 'Explicit: "قاله ابو عمرو ولم يزد الاصل في سورتي الفلق والناس على قوله وليس في الفلق والناس وقف حسن نعتمده تم الكتاب بعون الله وحسن توفيقه"', 'Incipit: "قال عمدة المحققين زين الملة والدين ابو يحيى زكريا الانصاري الشافعي ... الحمد لله على آلائه والصلاة والسلام على سيدنا محمد واله واصفيائه وبعد فهذا مختصر المرشد في الوقف والابتداء الذي الفه العلامة ابو محمد الحسن بن علي بن سعيد العماني رحمه الله تعالى وقد التزم ان يورد فيه جميع ما اورده اهل هذا الفن ... وسميته المقصد لتلخيص ما في المرشد ..."', 'Title from opening matter (preface) on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the abridgment by Abū Yaḥyá Zakarīyā ibn Muḥammad al-Anṣārī of al-Murshid fī al-waqf wa-al-ibtidāʼ, a work on recitation of the Qurʼān (specifically al-waqf wa-al-ibtidāʼ, i.e. sectioning or phrasing with pauses and starts) by Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan ibn Alī ibn Saʻīd al-ʻUmānī.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 140', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon. Dated ownership statements provided a terminus ante quem of 1778 though paper certainly suggests 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Slips with notes and exercises inserted (paginated pp.91-92 and pp.199-200).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 70. Grammatical works by Abu Suud, al-Zanjani, & Ibn Jinni." ; "٦٣٣" on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in marbled paper (blue and salmon) with spine, fore-edge flap and edges/turn-ins in dark red leather (marbled paper faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; in poor condition with much abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, pest damage, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart ; watermarks include triple mount with bird in profile in circle (compare Piccard no.153741 and 153742) ; well-sized and burnished ; much staining.', 'Decoration: Keywords, some titles, section headings, and some glosses rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; written area of incipit page surrounded by gold frame, written area elsewhere surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Large, bold naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) ; sans serif ; characteristic descent of words to baseline ; sweeping descenders and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 13 and roughly 7 lines per page ; written area of third work divided to three columns with verbs appearing in the two outer columns and elucidation on the diagonal in the center column ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 10 V(100), IV+3 (111), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Incipit: "قال المفتقر الى الله الودود احمد بن علي ابن مسعود غفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه اعلم ان الصرف ام العلوم والنحو ابوها ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "8. p.226-p.228 : [originally left blank, now carries excerpts, exercises, owners' marks, etc.].", '7. p.194-p.225 : Mithāl al-amthilah al-mukhtalifah.', '6. p.192-p.193 : [originally left blank, now carries excerpts, exercises, etc.].', '6. p.172-p.191 : [Bināʼ al-afʻāl].', '5. p.170-p.171 : [originally left blank].', '4. p.132-p.169 : [Kitāb al-Maqṣūd fī al-taṣrīf].', '3. p.130-p.131 : [originally left blank, now carries excerpts, etc.].', '2. p.93-p.129 : Kitāb al-ʻIzzī / ʻAbd al-Wahhāb ibn Ibrāhīm al-Zanjānī.', '1. p.4-p.90 : [Marāḥ al-arwāḥ] / Aḥmad ibn ʻAlī Ibn Masʻūd.', "Short collection (majmūʻah / mecmua) of grammatical works on Arabic morphology including Ibn Masʻūd's Marāḥ al-arwāḥ and Taṣrīf al-Zanjānī, along with the anonymous Kitāb al-Maqṣūd, Kitāb al-Bināʼ, and Mithāl al-amthilah al-mukhtalifah."])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Crown with shield and 3 stars; initials OA/C in roman with crown; lion.', 'Contains diagrams.', 'Text rubricated; marginal commentary in hand of copyist.', 'Date and name of copyist in colophon: Muṣṭafá ... sanat 1211 fī Ramaḍān [February-March 1797].', '"A treatise on the use of the sine quadrant in 17 marṣads." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 176.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 241', 'Origin: As appears at the close of each piece (kıta), executed by es-Seyit el-Hac Mustafa İzzet. In three of the signatures he includes "known as Reisülulema". He has signed the final piece "Bende-yi Al-i aba, Seyit İzzet Mustafa," a modest expression which, according to M. Uğur Derman (see Letters in gold, p.118), he preferred to use in his later years. Only one of the pieces is dated 1282 [1865 or 6] with the others likely completed around the same time or slightly later.', 'Former shelfmark: "570 T.D.M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" and "93" in pencil on opening panel.', 'Binding: Boards now covered in green and black mottled paper (sponge painted or faux marbled look, traces of another paper underneath) with dark purple to black leather over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; boards lined in same mottled paper ; panels hinged together in accordion format with same dark purple to black leather and hinged into case ; overall in fairly good condition with some abrasion and staining.', 'Support: Written area on well-burnished paper, pieced, set into frames of blue and orange-tinted paper, and mounted.', 'Decoration: Written area and divisions within surrounded by frames of gold defined by further gold and black fillets ; illuminated textual dividers in the form of gold rosettes with red and green-blue accents.', 'Script: Exquisite specimen of Ottoman calligraphy ; large opening line of each panel in thuluth (sülüs), followed by four lines in naskh (nesih).', 'Layout: Written in 5 lines per page, one large line of thuluth and four smaller lines of naskh.', 'Collation: Four panels hinged together in accordion (concertina) format ; opens vertically.', 'Colophon: [1] "حرره السيد الحاج مصطفى عزت المعروف برئيس العلماء غفر الله ذنوبه وستر عيوبه امين" ; [2] "حرره السيد الحاج مصطفى عزت المعروف برئيس العلماء غفر الله ذنوبه امين سنة ١٢٨٢" ; [3] "حرره السيد الحاج مصطفى عزت المعروف برئيس العلماء غفر الله ذنوبه وستر عيوبه امين" ; [4] "بندۀ آل عبا سيد عزت مصطفى"', 'Incipit: "اذكروا الله ذكرا كثيرا قال رسول الله صلوات الله عليه وسلامه مثل الذي يذكر ربه والذي لا يذكر ربه مثل الحي والميت ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Exquisite album of calligraphy (muraqqaʻ / murakkaa) of four kıtalar employing ḥadīth of the Prophet executed by the renowned Ottoman calligrapher Kazasker (Kadıasker) Mustafa İzzet Efendi (d.1876).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 826', 'Accompanying materials: Scrap from a printed page between pp.62-63.', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.728, copied by Mustafa bin Abdullah ( مصطفى بن عبد الله ), resident of Erzurum, with transcription completed Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1220 [February-March 1806]. As appears in preceding authorial colophon, composition completed 1170 [1756 or 7].', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in blue wove paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped, scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition) and pendants (lower cover retains onlays), as well as blind-tooled border ; sewn in black thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in purple and yellow, good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, negative draw in upper cover, fore edge flap small and ill-fitting, etc. ; repairs to spine in dark brown leather.', 'Support: European laid paper ; mainly with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 25-28 mm. apart (vertical), watermark of three hats (see p.7, 32, 420, 730, etc.) ; another type with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of large griffin (see p.24) ; all sturdy and well-burnished ; minor pigment burn at gold frames.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of text on p.26 consisting of rectangular piece with empty cartouche defined by gold flanking pieces, surmounted by scalloped w-shaped piece filled with swirling floral vegetal decoration in white, green, red, yellow, and pink on a gold ground, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in black and set in a well of orange, yellow and gold bands ; simple illuminated headpieces appear at opening of table of contents (p.4) and other sections throughout ; written area throughout surrounded by gold frame defined by black fillets ; keywords and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas ; occasional overlining in red ; illustrations of cosmic maps with Kaʻbah and Ḥaram at Jerusalem on pp.52-53 (compare British Library Or. 12964, fol.23b-23a, reproduced in Milstein, "The evolution of a visual motif: the Temple and the Kaʻba," pp.37-38), charts and diagrams of the different levels of being, celestial spheres, earth, lunar cycles, eclipses, fixed stars, and other astronomical topics mainly in pink, yellow, orange, lavender, light blue, green, gold and black with some tables in red and black (see p.62, 80, 81, 88, 92, 130, 133, 134, 135, 136, 150, 154, 155, 156, 157, 167, 169, 172, 181, 182, 182, 184, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 209, 217).', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, compact hand in a bold line ; serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, pointing (for two and three dots) often in strokes rather than distinct dots, curvilinear but somewhat angular descenders.', 'Layout: Written in 35 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off verses ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V+1 (11), 21 V(221), V+1 (232), 4 V(272), IV (280), 8 V(360), III (366), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and skips two pages between pp.47-48).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," reads "تأليف هذا الكتاب وقع فى تاريخ غقع ١١٧۰ نفع من به انفع" ; "Scribal," triangular, reads "قد تم تحرير هذا الكتاب المستطاب ... بعناية الملك الوهاب المسمى بمعرفتنامه الذى فوائده كثيرة للخلايق عامه من تأليف العالم العامل ... السيد الحاج ابراهيم الحقى الفقير الحليم السليم رحمة الله الرؤف الرحيم خليفة حضرت الشيخ سيدنا فقير الله قدس الله اسرارهم ... على يد الحقير الذليل الفقير المحتاج الى عناية الله الكريم مصطفى بن عبد الله الساكن في بلده ارزن الروم صان الله تعالى اهلها عن الافات والهموم ... فى شهر ى ذ [ذى] الحجة من سنة عشرون [كذا] ومائتين بعد الالف من هجرة من له العز والسعادة والشرف ... انك سميع قريب مجيب الدعوات ارحم بفضلك يا رب العالمين م م م"', 'Explicit: "ختمت هذا الكتاب بمناجات العارفين نظم حقى يه اولمز اوغلدر بو كتاب ... بو كتاب اوقيانى يازانى معرفت كنجيله باى ايت يا غنى تأليف هذا الكتاب وقع فى تاريخ غقع نفع من به انفع"', 'Incipit: "حمد بى حد وشكر بى عد وثناى مؤيد بر واحد فرد احد حضرتلرينه اولسونكه هر شان اكوانى علم ازليسيله مقدر ومبين قلوب ... بو حقير فقير حقيقى ابراهيم حقى اول عزيز شريف مخدومى السيد احمد نعيمى ايچون ... چونكه بو كتاب شريفك نظامى بو اسلوب لطيف اوزره تمام اولوب نظر قبولله مطالعه ايدنلرى حقيقت معرفت مولايه مطلع ايتمشدر پس بوكا معرفتنامه نام اولوب تاريخ اختتام بيك يوز يتمشه يتمشدر بيت دير بو تأليفنه حقى تاريخ معرفتنامه ده بيل ربكى هو"', 'Title from opening matter on p.27 and colophon on p.728.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the classical encyclopedic work by Erzurumlu (Erzurumî) İbrâhim Hakkı (d.1780) addressing topics chosen from geography, astronomy and the natural sciences, as well as theology and Sufism. Table of contents at opening (pp.4-23). Followed by a copy of brief letter from İbrâhim Hakkı to one of his brethren (pp.729-730).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 480', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.534, copied by Aḥmad ibn ... Dāwūd ibn Ayyūb ibn Aḥmad al-Jawraq [al-Jawzaq?] with transcription finished ("faragha minhu...") 6 Muḥarram 715 [ca. 12 April 1315].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 338a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in light brown and dark brown leathers with upper and lower covers mismatched ; Type II binding (originally with flap, now lost) ; upper board lining in laid European paper ; lower board lining in wove paper ; upper cover bears blind stamped mandorla (with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OSd 1) and pendants surrounded by tooled accents ; lower cover bears a tooled rule border ; sewn in heavy brown thread, four stations ; overall in poor condition with lifting and losses of leather (particularly at spine), abrasion and staining, upper cover detaching, etc. ; repairs to board edges in dark blue cloth ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European laid paper (likely Arab, even Egyptian) with 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and faint chain lines apparently arranged in 4 sets of 2, with 11-15 mm. between the chains and 43-52 mm. between the groups (compare the Cairene paper of 1326 in Table III of Humbert).', "Decoration: Some abbreviations (sigla) and vocalization for basmalah and headings rubricated ; keywords set off with red accents ; textual dividers in the form of three inverted commas (in red) and letter hāʼ (outlined in black, filled with red) ; diagram in the margin of p.402 accompanied by a note (not in the copyist's hand) explaining that it replicates a figure inscribed in al-Jamʻ bayna al-Ṣaḥīḥayn of al-Ḥumaydī (d. 488/1095) ; it corresponds to a drawing made by the Prophet described in the ḥadīth alongside the figure.", 'Script: Naskh ; bold, highly legible Egyptian [or Iraqi?] hand ; mainly serifless, though occasional left-sloping head serifs appear on medial lām, etc. ; alifs vertical and slightly tapered ; swooping descenders and frequent elongation of horizontal strokes ; both open and open and closed counters ; kāf mabsūṭah regularly employed, even for final kāf ; alif maqṣūrah often written with two dots above ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: IV (8), 10 V(108), VI (120), 4 V(160), VI (172), 9 V(262), III - 1 (267) ; chiefly quinions ; quire numbering in the form of whole words appears in the top left corner of the recto of the first leaf for quires 11 through 15 ; catchwords present ; pagination in Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads: "تم ... ومنه والحمد لله حق حمده فرغ منه بتوفيق الله وحسن تيسيره في يوم الجمعة السادس من شهر محرم سنة خمس وسبعماية ... احمد بن ... داود بن ايوب بن احمد الجورق [؟] ارشده الله واصلح شانه وقضى حوائجه وحوائج المسلمين بمنه وكرمه "', 'Explicit: "من الحسان قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم مثل امتي مثل المطر لا يدرى اوله خير ام اخرة"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله وسلام على عباده الذين اصطفى والصلاة التامة الدائمة على رسوله المجتبى محمد سيد الورى وعلى آله نجوم الهدى قال الشيخ الامام الاجل المحقق محيي السنة ابو محمد الحسين بن مسعود الفراء البغوي رحمة الله عليه اما بعد فهذه الفاظ صدرت عن صدر النبوة وسنن سارت عن معدن الرسالة ..."', 'Title from inscription on interior of upper cover.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of al-Baghawī's collection of traditions (aḥādīth) compiled from Bukhārī, Muslim, Tirmidhī, Abū Dāʼūd, etc. and organized by subject matter. Description provided by Noah Gardiner."])

en: (count: ['Contains diagrams and tables.', 'In Maghribī script.', 'Text and notes rubricated; marginal notes mostly in hand of copyist, some in another, non-Maghribī hand; tables in pp. [76-78] are in a different hand and probably were not originally part of this ms.', "Date and copyist's name in colophon: tammat al-Masāyil ... ʻalá yad al-faqīr ... ʻUmar Siwāh Maḥmūd ibn Yūsuf ibn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Saʻīdānī[?] al-Andalusī ... wāfaqa al-farāgh min nuskhatihi yawm al-ithnayn thāmin ʻashar Rabīʻ al-thānī sanat 1119 tisʻah ʻashar baʻd mīyah wa-alf ʻalá al-hijrah [19 July 1707].", 'Text (not this copy) published.', 'On astrology. Pp. [73-74] seem to be a separate faṣl in the same hand on the leap-year.'])

en: (count: ['Origin: As appears in authorial colophon on p.24, composition (and transcription?) of opening work completed 10 Dhū al-Qaʻdah 1075 [ca. 25 May 1665]. As appears in colophon on p.79, composition of second work completed 19 Muḥarram 932 [ca. 5 November 1525] with transcription of this copy likely contemporary or completed shortly after given collation statements in the hand of the author.', 'Former shelfmark: "۷۷" on pasted label affixed to upper cover ; "491 T. D. M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis] on back flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered (faced) in a dark red, coated paper with dark brown leather over spine and edges/turn-ins (leather edged framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap, two-piece with overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in a spring-green surface-dyed, coated wove paper ; upper and lower covers carry gold-painted rule-border ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and yellow, good condition (protected by extended spine leather) ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, etc.', 'Support: European and non-European laid papers ; opening work on European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart (horizontal), and sturdy, medium cream in color, quite well-burnished ; second work on a non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly distinct) and chain lines grouped in threes with 13-14 mm. between chains and roughly 38 mm. between groups, quite sturdy, fairly thick, and well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Keywords and some abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas.', 'Script: Naskh ; two main hands, distinct hand for each work ; opening work in a clear naskh, virtually serifless, with slight effect of tilt to the right and left, quite rounded with some elongation of horizontal strokes, curvilinear descenders, and pointing in distinct dots ; second work in a clear but larger and more spacious naskh, written in quite a thin line, virtually serifless displaying an open and horizontal character (elongated in the horizontal), with curvilinear but somewhat flattened descenders, kāf mashqūqah preferred, pointing in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 29 and 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, V (10), V-1 (19), V (29), ii ; exclusively quinions (one anomalous) ; catchwords present ; quire numbering in the form of whole words in the upper outer corner of the recto of the opening leaf ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: [Maslak al-iʻtidāl] "Authorial," reads: "قال المؤلف ابراهيم بن حسن الكوراني سامحه الله تعالى تم يوم الثلثا عشار ذي القعدة سنه ۱۰۷٥" ; [ Sharḥ Naẓm al-durar fī muwāfaqāt ʻUmar] ; "Authorial," reads: "قال مؤلفه هذا اخر ما قصدنا ايراده من هذا الكتاب المبارك النافع ان شاء الله تعالى وكان الفراغ من تأليفه يوم الاثنين وقت الظهر تاسع عشر شهر الله المحرم الحرام عام اثنين وثلاثين وتسعمائة ... ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم"', 'Explicit: [Maslak al-iʻtidāl] "اقتضت الحكمة اظهارها جودا ورحمة وبالله التوفيق ولي النعمة والحمد لله رب العالمين قال المؤلف ابراهيم بن حسن الكوراني سامحه الله تعالى تم يوم الثلاثا عاشر ذي القعدة سنه ۱۰۷٥" ; [ Sharḥ Naẓm al-durar fī muwāfaqāt ʻUmar] "توفي سنة خمس وخمسين على اختلاف في وفاته عن ثلاث وسبعين ينة واكثر وقيل جاوز الثمانين رضي الله عنهم اجمعين وحسبنا الله اي كافينا ونعم الوكيل اي الحافظ"', 'Incipit: [Maslak al-iʻtidāl] "الحمد لله الذي هدى الى توحيد الافعال في عين اثبات الكسب للعبد باذن الله العزيز الحكيم ... اما بعد فهذا بتوفيق الله مسلك الاعتدال الى فهم آية خلق الاعمال ينكشف فيه ان شاء الله اثبات الكسب للعبد باذن الله في عين توحيد الافعال ويظهر منه اختلال ما جرى عليه صاحب الكشاف بنا على قواعد الاعتزال ..." ; [ Sharḥ Naẓm al-durar fī muwāfaqāt ʻUmar] "الحمد لله نحمده ونستعينه ونستغفره ونستهديه ونؤمن به ونتوكل عليه ونسأله الخير كله ... وبعد فهذا تعليق على قصيدتي التي جمعت فيها موافقات امير المؤمنين عمر بن الخطاب رضي الله عنه المسماة بنظم الدرر في موافقات عمر يبين مرادها ويتمم مفادها اجابة لسؤال من سألني في ذلك ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.80 : [brief excerpt being a copy of a legal question raised before Ebusuud Efendi (d.1574) and the response].', '3. p.25-p.79 : Sharḥ Naẓm al-durar fī muwāfaqāt ʻUmar / Badr al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Ghazzī.', '2. p.5-p.24 : Maslak al-iʻtidāl ilá fahm āyat khalq al-aʻmāl / Ibrāhīm ibn Ḥasan al-Kūrānī.', '1. p.1-p.4 : [blank].', 'Careful copy of a work on divine determination of human action by Burhān al-Dīn Ibrāhim ibn Ḥasan ibn Shihāb al-Dīn al-Kurdī al-Kūrānī al-Shahrizūrī thumma al-Madanī (d.1690) followed by a commentary by Badr al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Ghazzī (d.1577) on his own Naẓm al-durar fī muwāfaqāt ʻUmar.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 292', 'Origin: As appears in final colophon at close of sixth daftar on p.614, copied by ʻAbd Allāh ibn Aḥmad al-Fasāyī [al-Fasāʼī, reading first supplied in note by Muhammad Isa Waley dated May 1980 on catalogue card] with transcription completed Jumādá II 1243 [December 1827]. As appears in colophon on p.99, transcription of first daftar completed 1 Rabīʻ II (presumably of 1243 [ca. 22 October 1827]). As appears in colophon on p.299, transcription of third daftar completed in the latter part of Jumādá I 1243 [December 1827]. As appears on p.499, transcription of fifth daftar completed Jumādá I 1243 [December 1827].', 'Former shelfmark: "174 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of opening leaf (p.1) ; "50 / 12" in brown ink on recto of opening leaf (p.1) ; "١" in pencil on recto of opening leaf (p.1).', 'Binding: Heavy pasteboards covered in painted lacquerwork with spine in red leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; likely two-piece binding ; doublures in fine painted lacquerwork with floral composition of three large blooms rising from a rooted stalk with leaves, all in gold on a red ground ; upper and lower covers carry central rectangular panel in brown with bronze flecks surrounded by borders of stalks and rules in bronze-gold as well as a band of delicate vegetal motifs with birds and fruits in shades of green, blue, white, red and orange ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations, reinforcements in dark blue thread ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with some abrasion, minor losses of laquer, etc. ; slightly ill-fitting and perhaps not original.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, quite distinct, some curving) and no chain lines plainly visible, transluscent and crisp though dense and sturdy, well-burnished to glossy, gray in color ; some cockling and creasing.', 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminated double-page opening (with illuminated headpiece / ʻunwān / sarlawḥ, gold cloud-bands and illuminated marginal decoration) at opening of each daftar (pp.6-7, 102-103, 188-189, 302-303, 394-395, 502-503), each unique but mainly involving rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche surmounted by rich well with w-shaped piece or dome set down in filled with floral vegetal decorations in shades of pink, orange, white, blue, yellow, and red on grounds of gold and dark blue and marginal decoration of saz leaves and floral forms chiefly in gold with red and blue accents ; preface to each daftar set in almond shaped medallion outlined in red rules ; written area surrounded by gold frame with outermost blue rule (divisions within defined by narrow gold bands outlined in black) ; keywords and headings rubricated or in blue ink.', 'Script: Naskh ; compact Persianate hand in a medium line ; chiefly serifless with fairly straight and vertical ascenders, pointing in combination of distinct (two dots, one above the other) and conjoined dots (three dots, two conjoined and third above), adhering to baseline, curvilinear descenders (some sweeping dramatically), ascender of kāf often curved back with shaqq / sarkash gently curving up, partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page with written area divided to four columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV+2 (10), 37 IV(306), II (310) ; almost exclusively quaternions ; final leaves ruled but left blank (pp.615-619) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "قد تم هذا المثنوی المولوی المعنوی بید عبد الله ابن احمد الفسایی فی یوم الخمیس شهر جمادی الاخری سنه ثلث و اربعون و مائتين بعد الالف من الهجره النبویة علیه واله تم م م م م م"', 'Explicit: "دردل من آن سخن زان مینمنه است زانکه ازدل جانب دل روزنه است', 'Incipit: "هذا کتاب المثنوی وهو اصول اصول اصول الدین فی کشف اسرار الوصول والیقین ..."', 'Title from colophons on pp.99, 299, 499 and 614.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of Mawlānā Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī’s didactic poetical work in double verses with Arabic preface. Contributions to the cataloguing from Elizabeth Kunze.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 295', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at close of fourth book (on margin of p.208) and in colophon at close of second book (p.510), copied by Ḥamd Allāh ibn Qavām al-Dīn Niẓām Bayāsānī [?] with transcription of fourth book completed 15 Jumādá II 896 [ca. 25 April 1491] and transcription of second book completed 7 Shaʻbān 896 [ca. 15 June 1491]. As appears in colophon on p.676, transcription of sixth book completed in 897 [1491 or 2]. As appears in final colophon on p.696, copying of third book completed in 896 [likely 1491].', 'Former shelfmark: "444 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', "Binding: Pasteboards covered in red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in shell 'marbled' paper in red and blue ; lining of fore edge flap in block-printed textile (floral pattern in red and black) and same shell 'marbled' paper ; upper and lower covers carry scalloped mandorla (stamped gold onlays with symmetrical composition) and pendants, as well as gold-stamped guilloché border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; design continues on flap ; sewn in pink and then green thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink, yellow and dark blue, good condition ; overall in fairly good condition though likely not original and ill-fitting text block (flap too small) with some abrasion, minor pest damage, etc. ; housed in box for protection.", 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (chiefly vertical, fairly indistinct) and no chain lines plainly visible, dense and sturdy though transluscent, dark cream to beige in color, well-burnished ; some moisture damage, staining and tide lines, pest damage ; repairs in non-European laid and wove paper.', 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of each mujallad, for the first three books being rectangular pieces gold or lapis cartouche carrying title in white surrounded by arabesques, interlace, and floral motifs on grounds of gold and lapis with black, red, light blue, white, and turquoise / pistachio accents (see pp.2, 226, 512) and for the final three books (appearing on the margins) more typically diamond shapes of similar composition (see pp.2, 210, 522) ; written area and ruled margins throughout surrounded by gold frame with divisions within defined by narrow gold bands (outlined in black) ; keywords and section headings rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand in a medium line ; characteristically serifless with gentle effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, sweeping descenders, pointing (somewhat casual) in distinct dots ; opening Arabic preface (and opening of fourth mujallad) in naskh, an elegant spacious hand, serifless with some sweeping descenders, adhering closely to baseline, pointing in distinct dots, extensively vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 20 lines per page in central written area, divided to two columns with an additional 42 lines on the diagonal in the margins ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iv, IV+1 (10), 41 IV (338), 2 III ( 350), iii ; almost exclusively quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of oblique strokes in black in in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf and lower outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present (though occasionally lost to trimming) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: [fourth book] "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمه المجلد الرابع من المثنوی فی یوم الاربعا خامس عشر شهر جمادی الاخر سنه سته تسعین وثمانمایه کتبه الفقیر حمد الله نظام بیاسانی [؟]" ; [second book] "Scribal," triangular, reads تمه المجلد الثانی من کتاب المثنوی المعنوی فی یوم الخامس سابع شعبان المعظم سنه سته تسعین وثمانمايه العبد الخالی [؟] حمد الله ابن قوام الدین نظام بیاسانی [؟]""', 'Incipit: "هذا کتاب المثنوی وهو اصول اصول الدین فی کشف اسرار الاصل والیقین ..."', 'Title from colophon of second book on p.510.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of Mawlānā Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī’s didactic poetical work in double verses with Arabic preface. Text of the first three books (mujallad / daftar) appears in the central written area with the text of the final three books provided concurrently on the diagonal in the margins. Contributions to the cataloguing from Elizabeth Kunze.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 293', 'Origin: As appears in colophon for sixth book ("المجلدة السادسة") on p.345, copied by Tursūn Muḥammad ibn Musāfir Ṣarrāf under the patronage ("بسعي واهتمام") of Ḥāfiẓ Yūsuf al-Bukhārī. Date of transcription not specified though decoration, etc. suggests late 16th or early 17th century (compare Isl. Ms. 270).', 'Accompanying materials: Scrap torn from a packet or advertisement with "بو مهره دقت اولنه" printed in black on one side and name only partially visible in gold [BAFRA ?]on reverse (between pp.166-167).', 'Former shelfmark: "522 T. D. M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "١٠٩" in ink on spine label.', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in dark green cloth with red leather over spine and edges / turn-ins (cloth faced and leather edged framed binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in shell marbled paper (mainly in dark green, red and yellow) ; false raised bands as ridges on spine ; hollow back ; now sewn in white thread, four stations ; stuck-on endbands in pale green and white ; text block has certainly been trimmed ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, some spine slant (slightly cocked), etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat indistinct) and no chain lines plainly visible ; transluscent and crisp though sturdy.', 'Decoration: Splendid illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ ) at opening of fourth book / daftar on p.2 consisting of a large (wide) rectangular piece with gold cartouche filled with swirling arabesque in red and flanked by pendants in gold overlaid with floral vegetal accents in gold, yellow, red, white, etc. on a blue ground (approaching lapis lazuli) with border in white and turquoise bands outlining heavy gold interlace, surmounted by rectangular piece with row of swirling arabesque on fields of lapis lazuli and gold with black and red accents, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; another splendid illuminated headpiece at opening of fifth book / daftar on p.104, very similar to the opening headpiece but with scalloped triangular piece (or hasp or dome, head lost to trimming) set in the upper rectangular piece ; at opening of sixth book on p.218, still another splendid illuminated headpiece of similar composition to the previous two but with even more elaborate arabesque and floral motifs and incorporation of an additional band of lozenges and eight-pointed stars (mainly in black, red and gold on a dark green ground overlaid with floral vegetal motifs and outlined in white) between the lower rectangular piece and upper rectangular piece with inset triangular piece or hasp ; written area (and columns within) throughout surrounded by a frame consisting of narrow gold band defined by gold fillets with outermost blue rule ; section headings, prefaces (mainly) and marginal numerals (marking verses) rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; compact, elegant Transoxanian hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page with written area divided into four columns (excluding prefaces and headings) ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 1+IV (9), 7 IV(65), IV+3 (76), IV-1 (83), IV-1 (90), 10 IV(170), I+1 (173), i ; almost exclusively quaternions (several anomalous) ; leaves now carrying pp.147-150 mistakenly bound between pp.146-151 though they should be between pp.166-167 (compare catchwords and line numbering) ; catchwords present though occasionally cut off ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, mainly in Arabic, reads "تمت المجلدة السادسة من المثنوى المعنوى المولوى من كلام سلطان العلماء والمحققين ملك الابدال ... جلال الحق والدين محمد بن محمد بن الحسن البلخى ... بسعى واهتمام جناب فضايلمآب سعادت اكتساب حافظ يوسف البخارى على يد العبد الضعيف ترسون محمد بن مسافر صراف غفر الله لهم"', 'Incipit: "الصغن الرابع [؟] الى احسن المرائع واجل المنافع تسر قلوب العارفين بمطالعته كسر والرياض بصوت الغمام ... اي ضياء الحق حسام الدين توى كه گذشت از بنورت مثنوى ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the fourth through sixth books (daftar / mujallad) of Mawlānā Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī’s didactic poetical work in double verses. Final lines of the third book also appear on opening leaf (p.1).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 362', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.361, copied by ʻAbd al-Rashīd al-Daylamī [?] with transcription completed in 1151 [1738 or 9]. 1151 from 151, being the more likely reading (given the author\'s dates, decoration, hand, etc.) of what the copyist has entered as "١٠٥١" which initially suggests 1051 [1641 or 2]. A similar practice with numerals appears in the foliation (see fol.110-120 i.e. ١٠١٠ to ١٠٢٠ as entered in red ink). Date in seal impression provides very rough terminus ante quem of 1756.', 'Accompanying materials: Half-sheet of writing paper with note in hand of G. Meredith-Owens, reads "362 | A mas̲navī poem of ethico-religious content. I cannot find the title and author but suspect that he is an Indian imitating Saʻdī and other Persian poets. Perhaps I could have a photostat of the first few folios. Indian, judging from the binding, probably 18th century."', 'Former shelfmark: "119 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type III binding in Western style ; doublures in dark red leather with scalloped mandorla, lozenges, floral pendants) pendants and cornerpieces in stamped, gold-painted paper onlays filled with floral compositions and set off by gold-painted rules (both lozenges and floral pendants appended to mandorla) ; made endpapers in comb marbled paper (chiefly in red, orange, black and blue) pasted to outermost leaf of a gathering of three (ternion) ; upper and lower covers carry large, central rectangular panel in stamped, gold-painted paper onlays (applied to recessed leather) filled with symmetrical floral vegetal composition set among interlacing scallops and surrounded by gold-painted and tooled borders (series of annular stamps) setting off wide border (also in recessed leather onlays with stamped, gold-painted paper applied) with additional vegetal motifs ; board edges gold-tooled in scroling vegetal designs ; spine similarly gold-stamped with bands of scrolling vegetal designs alternating with diamond shapes ; sewn in white thread over two cords (apparent as ridges on spine and visible between back endpapers and text block), tightly bound ; worked endbands in pistachio green and pink (interspersed with metallic threads) ; overall in fairly good condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of leather and onlays, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian) laid paper with roughly 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct) and single chain lines occasionally visible, thin, crisp and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished, dark cream to beige in color ; endpapers in still a different likely Indian laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, distinct, curving) and no chain lines plainly visible, cloudy formation, many inclusions, sturdy, gray in color ; some staining and tide lines, ink burn (more extensive in some gatherings), minor pest damage, cockling and excess adhesive ; extensive repairs (fills, guards, etc.).', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with basmalah set off by gold cloud-bands and flanked by delicate vegetal designs on gold ground, surmounted by w-shaped piece in gold and light blue overlaid with delicate vegetal designs with floral accents (mainly in pink with orange-red outline, green and black) set in a heavy well of gold interlace, pistachio green, pink and blue bands ; bands of refined vegetal motifs in gold also accent written area on incipit page (p.2) ; written area throughout surrounded by gold frame with divisions within also defined by narrow gold bands outlined in black ; section headings rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; large, elegant hand in a medium to heavy line ; characteristically serifless with gentle effect of words descending to baseline, superscripting of letters, elongation and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in distinct dots, occasionally set very close together or conjoined, dramatically sweeping shaqq or sarkash on many kāfs, point of final nūn set just down in wide, slightly angled bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 12 lines per page with written area divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: vi, 3 IV(24), III (30), 5 IV(70), III+2 (78), 6 IV(126), III+1 (133), IV (141), III+1 (148), IV (156), II (160), IV (168), II (172), IV+1 (181), vi ; chiefly quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of faint, oblique black strokes in the upper outer margin of the right-hand leaf and lower outer margin of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present (though occasionally lost or obscured by repairs) ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "مشقه العبد المذنب عبد الرشید الديلمی [؟] فی سنه ١٠٥١ه هجرة النبويه"', 'Explicit: "معتبر بنود تعدد در صفات"', 'Incipit: "حمد و شکر او را که هرچه هست ازوست دام هستی حلقه دار از های [و] هوست ..."', 'Title from inscription on second front flyleaf.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the short mas̲navī of Niʻmat Khān Shīrāzī, known as ʻĀlī (d.1710).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 357', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; decoration, etc. suggest mid to late 19th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "503 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" in pencil on upper board lining ; "(٩)" on \'title page\' (flyleaf pasted to recto of opening leaf, p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in light brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; likely two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; board linings in yellow wove paper, hinges in yellow wove paper of a lighter shade, flyleaves (now pasted to opening and closing leaves) in magenta wove paper ; upper and lower covers blind-tooled in mitred-panel style with outer border in a series of s-shaped stamps framed by double rules ; sewn in white thread, two stations, somewhat tightly bound ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and red, good condition ; overall in good condition with minor abrasion and staining.', 'Support: European and non-European (likely Persian) laid paper ; bulk of first two gatherings (and a few folia of other gatherings) in European laid paper with roughly 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), and single chain lines (vertical) spaced 23-26 mm. apart, with no watermark distinctly visible (perhaps lost in folding / trimming), heavily sized and burnished to glossy, sturdy though transluscent, cream in color ; folia of other gatherings chiefly in non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with roughly 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat diffuse and indistinct) and no chain lines clearly visible, cloudy formation, inclusions, heavily sized and burnished, sturdy though transluscent, dark cream in color ; some staining, excess adhesive, repairs, cockling.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2, consisting of rectangular piece with basmalah in red set off by gold cloud-bands and gold flanking panels, surmounted by elongated piece with central knotted arabesques (in pink with red and black on a dark blue ground and gold with red and black) surrounded by swirling floral forms in light blue (outlined in dark blue), pink (outlined in lavender), orange, red, bright green and yellow on a gold ground, all set in a heavy well with red band overlaid with delicate repeating vegetal motifs in white, light blue and yellow and a heavy band of gold interlace defined by bright green bands ; written area throughout surrounded by gold frame with outermost blue rule, divisions within and margins defined by narrow gold bands outlined in black ; glosses and opening section heading rubricated (elsewhere division between sections indicated by a line left blank).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand, small though spacious in a thin to medium line ; characteristically serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, superscripting of letters, elongation and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in distinct dots, point of final nūn set at opening of wide, angled bowl ; rubricated interlinear glosses in shikastah-nastaʻlīq.', 'Layout: Written in 7 lines per page with written area divided to two lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 5 IV(40) ; exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: [ʻIbratʹnāmah] "از خلوتیان اثر نیابی در بانانشان بدر نایابی" ; [Mas̲navī dar hajv-i yakī az ḥukkām / Tuḥfat al-ʻIrāqayn] "بادی ز دواهی سماوی چون دیک زناب ابن آوی"', 'Incipit: [ʻIbratʹnāmah] "دیباچه این خجسته دیبا پیرایۀ این پرند زیبا نام ملک الملوک اعظم آرایش چار بالش جم ..." ; [Mas̲navī dar hajv-i yakī az ḥukkām / Tuḥfat al-ʻIrāqayn] "ای طایر عیسی آفرینش چون طایر عیسوی ببینش ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '2. p.65-p.78 : [Mas̲navī dar hajv-i yakī az ḥukkām] / Ṣabā, Fatḥ ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad.', '1. p.2-p.65: [Mas̲navī-yi ʻIbratʹnāmah] / Ṣabā, Fatḥ ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad.', 'Elegant, pocket-sized copy of two satirical mas̲navīs from the collected works (kullīyāt / dīvān-i ashʻār) of Ṣabā-yi Kāshānī, Fatḥ ʻAlī Khān known as Malik al-Shuʻarāʼ (d.1822 or 3), namely the ʻIbratʹnāmah, denouncing individuals making mischief during the reign of Fatḥ ʻAlī Shāh Qājār (r.1797-1834) followed (as though it were simply another section of the preceding) by Mas̲navī dar hajv-i yakī az ḥukkām also called Tuḥfat al-ʻIrāqayn.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 878', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.283, transcription completed in 1 Jumādá I 1102 [ca. 31 January 1691] possibly for Makhdūm Shaykh Burāq Ṣadīqī (مخدوم شيخ براق صديقى)', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip of paper with description in hand of G. Meredith-Owens "MO 19 Maṭāliʻ al-anwār by ʻAfīf ibn Nūr Kashānī. Copied in 1102. life of the Prophet." -- b. Slip of paper with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Meredith-Owens notes" -- c. Slip of paper with note "Counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" -- d. Scrap with two lines of printed text "... is the best perfumed antiseptic and is unrivall[ed] ... air, and also as a preventer against contagious ..." (between p.258-259).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 27', 'Binding: Heavy pasteboards faced in comb marbled paper (mainly in red, white and blue-green) and edged in brown leather (marbled paper faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted paper ; now sewn in white thread over three raised bands (other raised bands at spine appear to be false) ; worked chevron endbands in pink and light brown, fairly good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with lifting and losses of leather, lower cover fully detached, upper joint splitting, staining, abrasion, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat indistinct, curving), chain lines irregularly visible, cloudy formation, some inclusions visible, thin though sturdy, burnished, dark cream to beige in color ; staining and tide lines, minor pest damage, some repairs (guards, fills).', 'Decoration: Exaggerated elongation of strokes used to set off some section markers (i.e. keywords such as فصل) ; two-teeth stroke overlining some keywords.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant, spacious, fairly large Indian hand in a medium line ; characteristically serifless with gentle effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing (two and three dots) in strokes, alif maqṣūrah often pointed as yāʼ, point of final nūn often assimilated with or set down in tall bowl ; Arabic excerpts (chiefly from the Qurʼān, etc. and fully vocalized) in naskh.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 17 IV (136), IV-2 (142), ii ; exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; middle of the quire marks in the form of black oblique strokes in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf and lower outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "تمام شد نسخه مطالع الانوار بعون الله تعالی وتوفیقه حق مالک بخط ... قطب الاقطاب قدوة العارفین عمده السالکین مخدوم شیخ براق صدیقی شهر جمادی الاول بتاریخ غره سنه ١١٠٢ یکهزار یکصد ودو هجری بروز دوشنبه وقت جاشت تحریر یافت ..."', 'Explicit: "و اقارب بالقبول سالمین دعایی المنقطع من باب امالی و رضای و اختم السموات و بغیاتی فانک ارحم الراحمین وصلی الله علی خیر خلقه محمد وآله اجمعین وسلم تسلیما وتعظیما كثیر كثیرا برحمتک یا ارحم الراحمین"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمین والصلوة علی سید المرسلین وخاتم النبیین محمد واله اجمعین اضعف ترین بندگان حضرت ربانی عفیف نور کاشانی بلغه الله تعالی الی نیل الامانی چنین گوید این بنده داعی ...', 'Title from opening matter on p.4.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of the work on the life of the Prophet in twenty-one chapters by ʻAfīf Nūr Kāshānī (al-Kīlānī). Contributions to the cataloguing from Elizabeth Kunze.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 242', 'Origin: As appears in colophon, executed by Hasan Rıza Efendi in imitation of a model by the renowned calligrapher Kazasker (Kadiasker) Mustafa İzzet Efendi (d.1876) with transcription completed in 1304 [1886 or 7]. Signature in the illuminated panel to the left of the close identifies the gilder (mudhahhib, müzehhip) as Hasan Rıza.', 'Former shelfmark: "563 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on interior of upper cover ; "94" inscriped in pencil on recto of opening leaf/\'panel\'.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark lavender leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in golden yellow to orange surface-dyed paper ; upper and lower covers carry exquisite gold-stamped scalloped octagonal piece (filled with vegetal decoration emanating from a central floral motif) and rosette accents (at the apices of the scallops, forming pendants, etc.), as well as elaborate tooled border in gold accented by gold-painted fillets ; overall in somewhat poor but fair condition with only minor abrasion, losses of silk, panels detaching from spine and warping in some, and lifting of spine leather.', 'Support: Well-burnished paper mounted on heavy board, with area framing written area surface-dyed (golden yellow to orange) and gold-flecked, edged in red silk ; sheets of red wove paper rest between many of the panels.', 'Decoration: Illuminated panels consisting of rectangular panels filled with various swirling vegetal patterns on fields of gold, blue, light pink, etc. and surrounded by frames in blue, green, light pink, red, etc. flanking mainly the lines of naskh ; entire written area surrounded by heavy gold and light pink frames with narrower gold rules surrounding panels within ; textual dividers in the form of illuminated rosettes with accents in green, pink, blue, white, etc.', 'Script: Exquisite specimen of Ottoman calligraphy ; large line of each page in a fine thuluth ; central lines of each page in a superb naskh ; fully vocalized ; each continues a distinct stream of ḥadīth text or excerpts.', 'Layout: Written in 5 and 6 lines per page, a large line of thuluth followed by four or five lines of naskh, with lines in thuluth and those in naskh constituting two distinct streams of text ; written area is divided into upper panel accomodating the large line of thuluth and centered lower panel carrying the more compact lines of naskh ; opens vertically with writing parallel to spine.', "Collation: Six heavy leaves or 'panels' hinged together.", 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads: "حرره الحاج السيد حسن رضا مقلدا بمصطى عزت غفر الله ذنوبهما وستر عيوبهما امين سنه ١٣٠۴"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Exquisite album of calligraphy (muraqqaʻ or murakkaa) employing assorted ḥadīth, executed by the renowned Ottoman calligrapher Hasan Rıza Efendi (d.1920), a master of naskh and thuluth.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 919', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Accompanying materials: Tipped in at opening (paginated pp.1-32), half-sheets carrying "الجزء السادس من مطالع السعود تلخيص مصباح الانس بين المعقول والمشهود شرح مفتاح غيب الجمع والوجود"', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 68', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "مطالع السعود | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Wove paper, at least two different types.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact, modern hand in a medium to bold line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of inclination to the right, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots ; occasionally changes ink (back and forth between black and now grey-blue) and line thickness (see p.123, etc.).', 'Layout: Written in roughly 16-24 lines per page ; not frame-ruled with lines sloping up.', "Collation: Pages between sections left blank or partially blank (to serve as 'title pages,' see pp.33, 72-73, 112-113) ; opening leaves (pp.1-32) on tipped in half-sheets ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (see pp.34-57) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "المتكلم منه في هذا الفصل والله يقول الحق ويهدي من يشاء الى صراط مستقيم"', 'Incipit: "وبه كان ما كان وبه يكون ما يكون الاصل الرابع عشر في تعين صورة الكرسي بعد تعين صورة العرش ثم ظهر عن الحق لانه مبدأ كل ظهور وبه اي بتجليه الاحدى الساري في المراتب ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.33).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of selections from Maṭāliʻ al-suʻūd, an abridgement of Misbāḥ al-uns bayna al-maʻqūl wa-al-mashhūd, a commentary by Muḥammad ibn Ḥamzah ibn Muḥammad al-Fanārī (d.1431) on Miftāḥ ghayb al-jamʻ wa-al-wujūd, Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Qūnawī’s (d.1274) chief philosophical work.'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Three hats (?); initials AG in roman.', 'Contains geometrical diagrams and mathematical tables.', 'No rubrication.', 'Problems and calculations in geometry and trigonometry noted by an anonymous person. On the first few pages the notes are in Arabic, after which they are in Turkish.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 314', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, etc. may suggest 16th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "209 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; two-piece binding (overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in bright pink textured and coated paper ; upper and lower covers carry gold-painted (in two different shades) spray of flowers and leaves at the center of a rectangular panel with cornerpieces and surrounding border in heavy gold bands and rules ; edges of text block gilt ; now sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and blue-green, excellent condition ; overall in good condition with only minor abrasion and staining.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and no chain lines clearly visible, sturdy, though fairly transluscent, well-burnished, beige in color ; written area gold-flecked.', 'Decoration: Sublime illuminated headpiece ( ʻunwān / sarlawḥ ) at opening on p.2 consisting of large rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche surrounded by swirling arabesque with floral accents in gold, red, white, etc. on fields of lapis lazuli and gold (evoking book cover design) with border in white and lapis lazuli bands outlining heavy gold interlace, surmounted by band of black with arabesque and floral motifs in white, red, gold, etc. and scalloped triangular piece or hasp continuing the floral vegetal design on fields of gold and lapis lazuli, all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area gold-flecked and surrounded by frame consisting of gold band defined by black fillets and outermost blue rule ; keywords and headings in blue.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; compact, elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 12 lines per page with written area divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 10 IV(80), I+1 (83), i ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "بو که ز نزهتگه [نزهتگاه] دار السلام بوی علیكی رسدم و السلام"', 'Incipit: "بسم الله الرحمن الرحیم خطبۀ قدست بملك قدیم ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of Maṭlaʻ al-anvār, a moral and religious poem opening the Khamsah of Amīr Khusraw Dihlavī (d.1325), written in imitation of the opening mas̲navī of Niẓāmī's Khamsah, Makhzan al-asrār."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 959', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.19, transcription of opening work completed 3 [?] Shaʻbān 1226 [ca. 23 August 1811]. As appears in colophon on p.130, transcription of second work completed 8 Shawwāl 1183 [ca. 4 February 1770].', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 108', 'Binding: Boards covered in textured black cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "متن السنوسي متن الحقائق ولوعة الشاكي" ; sewn in white thread over three recessed cords ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion.', 'Support: European laid paper of three different types, each section in a distinct type ; opening section (carrying first work) in a type with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 26-29 mm. apart (vertical), and three crescents watermark (perpendicular to chains, see pp.6, 8, 14, etc.), quite sturdy, dark cream in color, well-burnished, minor ink burn ; second section (carrying second work) mainly in a type with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 25 mm. apart (vertical), and watermarks of three crescents (perpendicular to chains, see pp.26, 82, 86, 90, etc.) and possibly crown-star-crescent (see p.108, etc.), sturdy, medium cream in color, well-burnished ; replacement section (pp.41-60) in still another type with three crescents watermark (see pp.48, 50, 52).', 'Decoration: Keywords rubricated ; some overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; two clear though somewhat awkward Egyptian hands, the opening hand in a bold line, the latter in a medium line ; opening hand supplying the first work (though p.19) large and serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, elongation of many descenders, many closed counters, pointing in distinct dots except for three dots (represented by a curved stroke resembling an inverted comma), alif maqṣūrah usually pointed as yāʼ ; hand supplying second work (from p.21) small and seriffed with right sloping head-serifs on most ascenders, curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah usually pointed as yāʼ ; replacement section (pp.41-60) in still a different hand, awkward, large, elongated and somewhat flattened in the horizontal.', 'Layout: Written in 15 and 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board visible (see pp.19-20, 132-134 in particular).', 'Collation: i, 6 V(60), III+2 (68), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly skips two pages between pp.121-122).', 'Colophon: [Matn al-Ḥaqāʼiq] "Scribal," triangular, reads "تم هذا الكتاب بحمد الله وعونه وحسن توفيقه في يوم الثلاث المبارك من شهر شعبان من شهور سنة ١٢٢٦ والله اعلم" ; [Qiṣṣat al-shākī wa-lawʻat al-bākī] "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمت هذه النسخة المباركة بحمد الله تعالى وعونه وحسن توفيقه والله اعلم ثمانية من شوال سنة ١١٨٣ من الهجرة النبوية "', 'Explicit: [Matn al-Ḥaqāʼiq] "في محل العبد مخالفا لامر الرب والخلالان مثله اللهم انا نسألك العصمة من هؤلاء وبالله التوفيق ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم تسليما كثيرا الى يوم الدين" ; [Qiṣṣat al-shākī wa-lawʻat al-bākī] "وهذا من لطف الله الكثير يسير لانه بالحال عليم خبير وبالاجابة جدير وهو على جمعهم اذا يشاء قدير ... وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل نعم المولى ونعم النصير"', 'Incipit: [Matn al-Ḥaqāʼiq] "هذه حقائق عقيدة الشيخ الفاضل ... سيدي محمد بن يوسف السنوسي ... حقيقة الحمد هو الثناء بالكلام على المحمود بجميل صفاته ..." ; [Qiṣṣat al-shākī wa-lawʻat al-bākī] "الحمد لله رب العالمين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم تسليما كثيرا ... اما بعد حمدا لله الذي قضى بالمحنة والولوع وحكم باحراق كبد كل عاشق وولوع ... وبعد فاني اعرف اخواني واصحابي وخلاتي واترابي سلمهم الله من فتكات العشق ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from inscriptions on 'title pages' for opening work (p.1) and for second work (p.21).", 'Ms. composite codex.', '3. p.21-p.130 : Kitāb Qiṣṣat al-shākī wa-lawʻat al-bākī [ayy Lawʻat al-shākī wa damʻat al-bākī] / lil-Shaykh al-Imām Ibn Ḥajalah [ayy li-Ṣalāḥ al-Dīn Khalīl ibn Aybak al-Ṣafadī].', '2. p.20 : [blank].', '1. p.1-p.19 : Hādhā Matn al-Ḥaqāʼiq / Muḥammad ibn Yūsuf al-Sanūsī.', "Composite manuscript opening with Abū ʻAbd Allāh Muḥammad ibn Yūsuf al-Sanūsī's (d.1490) elucidation of the terms utilized in his treatise on the essentials of faith, Umm al-barāhīn, followed by Lawʻat al-shākī wa damʻat al-bāqī, al-Ṣafadī’s (d.1363) maqāmah in rhymed prose and verse on the pangs of love between young men, on the 'title page' here entitled Qiṣṣat al-shākī wa-lawʻāt al-bākī and attributed to Ibn Ḥajalah."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 617', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon (though lengthy authorial colophon appears on p.290) ; paper and hand may suggest 16th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From fore edge flap label, "IL 348" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in block-printed paper (resembling marbled [ebru] design in blue and white) with red leather over spine and light brown leather over fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in light orange European laid paper (three hats watemark) ; sewing now gone, though two stations visible ; overall in quite poor condition with upper cover entirely lost and lower cover and envelope flap fully detached, lifting and losses of leather, staining, etc.', "Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines (vertical) grouped in threes with 6-9 mm. between chains and 46-55 mm. between groups ; medium cream in color, dense and sturdy, well-burnished to glossy (burnisher's marks visible) ; staining and tidelines ; some repairs.", 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant hand ; serifless and quite rounded with slight effect of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), elongation of horizontal strokes, occasional sweeping descenders.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', "Collation: 14 V(140), II+1 (145) ; almost exclusively quinions ; leaf now affixed to 'title page' (p.1) and final leaf (p.290, to cover added text) ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "وقد مر ذلك ولو ذكرت احرف الجر ودخول بعضها على بعض في معناه لجاء من ذلك امثلة كثيرة"', 'Incipit: "ومنه العون والتوفيق اما بعد حمدا لله على افضاله والصلوة والسلام على سيدنا محمد واله فان اولى ما تقترحه القرائح واعلى ما تجنح الى تحصيله الجوانح ما يتيسر به فهم كتاب الله المنزل ويتضح به معنى حديث نبيه المرسل ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of Ibn Hishām’s (d.761/1360) celebrated treatise on Arabic syntax, arranged by particle.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1026', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.366, copied by Ibrāhīm ibn Maḥmūd with transcription completed "fī yawm al-ʻArafah al-uḍḥīyah..", i.e. 9 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 989 [ca. 4 January 1582].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with description in hands of Eilts and Jameson "Fiqh | Kitāb al-Ṭahārah | & other texts | on Islamic ritual requirements | Brought to RBR on 10-27-70 by Mr. Eilts. | Purchased by Mr. Sulaiman from Librarie Tunisienne in 1967. Letter & invoice in MSS file. | author | date of mss unknown" and on verso "Hanafite legal texts"', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 175', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, now lost) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. NSd 7) and tooled border ; sewn in cream thread, two stations, failing ; worked chevron endbands in cream and pale pink, in poor condition with losses to headband (almost entirely gone) and tailband ; overall in somewhat poor condition with much abrasion, extensive pest damage, delamination and losses of boards, loss of flap, spine almost fully detatched from textblock, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), watermark of anchor (single line) in circle with six-pointed star above (see p.18, 36, 46, 121, etc.) and countermark of "H S" (see p.44 and compare no.38 in Velkov, Les Filigranes dans les documents Ottomans), sturdy, cream in color, well-burnished ; extensive pest damage ; added leaves and flyleaves in different European papers.', 'Decoration: Section headings and some abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke overlining keywords) rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant, spacious hand in a thin line ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, open and closed counters, pointing (two and three dots) mainly in conjoined dots, alif maqṣūrah occasionally pointed as yāʼ, tāʼ maftūḥah rather than tāʼ marbūṭah occasionally employed, extensively vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 5 (5), V-2 (13), 16 V(173), V-2 (181), ii ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and added leaves at opening).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "قد وقع الفراغ من تحرير هذا الكتاب في شهر ذي الحجة الحرام في يوم العرفة الاضحية سنة تسع وثمانين وتسع مائت تمت ... وانا الفقير المقر بالذنب والتقصير سليمان بن محمود غفر الله ذنوبهم وستر عيوبهم وجعل مسكنهم بحبوحة جنانه امين بحرمت سيد الاولين والاخرين واله الطيبين واصحابه المطهرين ..."', 'Explicit: "فاذا صحت المسئلة المناسخة واردت معرفة ما نسبة كل واحد من جناب [؟] الدرهم قسمت ما صحت منه المسئلة على ثمانية واربعين فما خرج اخذت له من سهام كل واحد حبة حبة والله اعلم وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم تسليما دائما ابدا الحمد لله على الاتمام"', 'Incipit: "كتاب الطهارة قال الله تعالى يا ايها الذين امنوا اذا قمتم الى الصلاة فاغسلوا وجوهكم وايديكم الى المرافق وامسحوا برؤسكم [برؤوسكم] وارجلكم الى الكعبين ففرض الطهارة غسل الاعضاء الثلاثة ومسح الرأس والمرفقان والكعبان يدخلان في الغسل ..."', 'Title from inscription on added leaf at opening (p.11).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of the celebrated Ḥanafī legal manual by Abū al-Ḥusayn Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad al-Qudūrī (d.1037).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 888', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.486, transcription completed 10 Jumādá I 1242 [?] [ca. 10 December 1826 ?, numerals have been tampered with and third numerals is particularly unclear, i.e. 12?2] on the order of ʻAṭā Ḥusayn Khānʹṣāḥib ( عطا حسين خانصاحب ). As appears in preceding authorial colophon on p.485, composition completed in 1231 [1816 or 17].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with note "counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" -- b. Slip with note "Persian Manuscripts (Heyworth-Dunne?) No Husselman or Meredith-Owen notes" -- c. Page torn from Luzac & Co. catalog, 1908, "Books on Modern Persian Literature," with description for this manuscript "AMIR IBN KHWĀJA PADSHĀH KHĀN. Maẓḥar al-ʻajāʼib. A dictionary of Names and Epithets found in Persian Poets. Composed in 1231 A.H. Persian MS. Roy. 8vo, leather bound. 12s. 1826. The margins of many pages have been neatly repaired." -- d. Slip with description in black ink "Persian | Amīr ibn Khwāja Pādshāh Khān | Maẓḥar al-ʻajāʼib. A dictionary of names and epithets found in Persian poets describing the lover and the beloved. Composed in 1231 A.H. | Dated 1242 (?) = 1826 A.D."', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 37', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in royal blue leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted wove paper ; sewn in cream thread over two recessed cords ; worked chevron endbands in cream and purple, good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with roughly 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat indistinct, some curving) and occasional chain lines faintly visible, cloudy formation, quite thin and transluscent though sturdy, cream in color, well-burnished ; extensive repairs in wove paper.', 'Decoration: Some keywords and headings rubricated, others overlined in red (mainly with two-teeth stroke abbreviation symbol).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; spacious, elegant hand ; mainly serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and somewhat exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes as well as distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, IV (8), III (14), IV (22), IV+1 (31), 7 IV(87), III (93), 10 IV(173), I+1 (176), 3 IV(200), II (204), 4 IV(236), II+1 (241), i ; chiefly quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form black oblique strokes in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf and the lower-outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes pastedowns and flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "بتاریخ دهم جمادى الاول سنه ۱۲۴۲ [؟] هجری نبوی نسخه مظهر العجایب تصنیف خواجه امیر ولد خواجه بادشاه خان بموجب فریامش عطا حسین خانصاحب [؟] سلمه الله تعالى ... باختتام رسید بمنه وکرمه"', 'Incipit: "وجه [؟] تالیف این نسخه انکه ... در شهر کالپی نور چشم عزیز ازجان احمد بخش خان طال الله عمره بنزیره نواب عماد الملك آصفجاه ... مجموعۀ بعضی از مصطلحات و محاورات مختلفه دیوان شیخ علی حزین رحمة الله علیه ..."', 'Title from colophon on p.486.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of a work by Khvājah Amīr valad-i Khvājah Pādishāh Khān addressing the terms and expressions used in the Dīvān of Muḥammad ibn Abī Ṭālib Ḥazīn of Lāhijān, known as Shaykh ʻAlī Ḥazīn (d.1766).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1045', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; contents, paper, etc. would suggest mid to late 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Descriptive notes on University of Michigan letterhead in hand of Eleazer Birnbaum, signed ("E. Birnbaum") and dated May 26 1964, "Turkish MS. written in a taʻlīk hand. 204 ffol. \'Title\' on first flyleave مجموعه دواوين شعرا = Memūʻa-yı Devāvīn-i Şuʻarā | \'Collection of Turkish Divans.\' Contains 1. Divan of Riyāzī Efendi and his Sāḳī-nāme and his Rubāʻīyat (Quatrains) 2. Yaḥyā Efendī\'s Sāḳī-nāme 3. Dīvān of Nādirī Efendi 4. Divan of Ḥaletī Ef. 5. Tezkere-i Şuʻarā of Riyāzī Efendi (incomplete) [= Biographical dictionary of Ottoman poets] 6. Divan of Sabrī [d. 1645] 7. Dīvān of Nevʻīzāde ʻAtāʼī [1583-1634] 8. Divan of Veysī Efendi [1561-1628] 9. Muḳaddime of Ḳaysūnzāde | Copy ca. 17-18th cent."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in shell marbled wove paper (mainly in shades of blue) ; upper and lower covers carry stamped lozenge ornament filled with symmetrical vegetal composition set off by gold-painted accents, as well as gold-painted rule borders ; now sewn in white thread, six stations, tightly bound ; worked chevron endbands in white and olive green, excellent condition ; overall in fair condition with some negative draw in covers, abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, minor delamination of boards, etc. ; repairs to spine (rebacked) and board corners in dark mauve-brown leather ; housed in custom box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; main type with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 20-22 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of latin cross in heart with initials "B S" above (see p.74, 388, etc.) ; another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced roughly 33 mm. apart (vertical) and watermark of three circles with crescent in uppermost and initials in middle, cross above (see p.110, 120, 130, 150, 244, etc.) ; another type with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced roughly 25 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of paschal lamb (see p.154, 156, etc.) ; all thin and quite transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished to glossy ; some leaves tinted yellow, pale blue or pink ; other watermarks include "V d" / "b V" under trefoil countermark (p.6), crossbow in circle (p.10) and maltese cross in circle (p.108, 128) ; flyleaves in European laid paper with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (vertical), watermark of crown-star-crescent (see front flyleaf, p.2) and countermark of "S S" under trefoil (see back flyleaf, p.400).', 'Decoration: Headings and keywords rubricated ; overlining in red (often of names appearing in the verses, i.e. of poet, etc.) ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; mainly an elegant Turkish / Ottoman hand in a medium line ; spacious and serifless with slight effect of inclination to the right, gentle descent of words to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, mainly closed counters, pointing (two and three dots) mainly in strokes.', 'Layout: Highly variable, but as many as 41 lines per page, typically in two columns, occasionally on the diagonal with further lines up the center ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, II (4), 4 V(44), II+3 (51), 6 V(111), II+2 (117), V (127), IV+1 (136), V (146), V+1 (157), 3 V(187), V-1+1 (197), iii ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present (often obscured by guards) ; leaves between sections often left fully or partially blank ; foliation in pencil, Western numerals (possibly supplied by bookseller) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing (includes some flyleaves and mistakenly skips two pages between pp.307-308).', 'Incipit: "معراجية ومدح حضرت سيد الكونين صلى الله تعالى عليه وسلم كم ايتدى جوهرن خاك انجره خورشيد جهان آرا انى بولماغه غريال ايتدى حاضر طارم والا ..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf (p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine "agenda" format volume containing assorted excerpts from the collected poems of several Turkish poets, including Riyâzî (d.1644), Zekeriyazade Yahya Efendi (d.1644), Ganîzâde Nâdirî Mehmet Efendi (d.1626), Azmîzade Mustafa Haletî (d.1631), Sabrî (Mehmet Şerîf b. Ahmed İlmî Edirnevî, d.1646), Nevizade Atayi Ataullah b. Yahya (d.1635), and Veysî (Üveys b. Mehmet Alaşehrî, d.1628), as well as from Riyâzî\'s biographical dictionary of poets ; contents listing on added leaf at opening (p.3). Contributions to the cataloguing from Elizabeth Kunze.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 356', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper would suggest 16th or perhaps early 17th century ; dated calligraphic inscriptions (see p.9 and 11) provide terminus ante quem of 1640.', 'Former shelfmark: "264" inscribed in pencil on added leaf (p.5) ; "394 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on added leaf (p.6).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings (doublures) in comb marbled paper (mainly in pink, blue, black, and yellow) ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OAi) with gold-painted accents and tooled border ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in blue and yellow, fair condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (perhaps Persian) and European laid papers of several types ; added leaves in a type with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (horizontal) and crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.8, 10, 11, etc.), cream in color, sturdy and burnished ; main type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (horizontal), and angel with wings (in circle) watermark (see p.170-171, etc.), thin but quite sturdy ; many leaves tinted (pink, etc.) and interspersed with silhouette or shadowed paper decorated in exquisite vegetal-floral (see pp.20, 33, 41, 51, 69, 165, etc.) and even textual (see p.31) compositions (some outlined or filled in ink or gold) ; to occasional leaves marbled or other decorative papers have been applied (see pp.72, 80, 91-92, 124, 125, etc.).', "Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece at opening on p.20 consisting of large rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche surrounded by swirling floral vegetal accents in gold, red, white, pink, blue, etc. on grounds of gold and blue (lapis or cobalt), bordered in blue band with diamonds or crosses and surmounted by a small scalloped dome in similar design, itself surmounted by tall vertical stalks (tīgh) ; written area in opening section surrounded by a gold frame with devisions within also defined by gold bands ; in some sections headings (mainly poets' names) rubricated (see p.150, etc.) or chyrsographed (see p.172) ; extensive use of decorative papers (silhouette, marbled, gold-flecked, tinted, etc.) including one case where the calligraphic inscription has been cut away from a marbled paper and applied over a tinted leaf underneath (see p.124).", 'Script: Mainly nastaʻlīq (talik) and naskh ; elegant, even calligraphic Ottoman hands ; larger talik, thuluth and riqāʻ (see p.120, etc.), divani, etc. appear in some of the calligraphic inscriptions.', "Layout: Highly variable, though some consistency according to calligraphic style employed ; in opening section written area divided to two columns with 10 lines (single hemistich to a line) on the diagonal per column and poet's name above, then a similar arrangement of lines in three larger columns (see p.24), followed by the smaller arrangment in two columns (see p.31), etc. ; an arrangment of 12-14 lines in two large columns also appears (see p.37, etc.) with some lines on the diagonal and others not ; another arrangement features 8 large lines (see p.87) ; still another features 25 hemistiches in 15 lines (see p.93, etc.).", 'Collation: I (2), III+1 (9), V-1 (18), V (28), III (34), IV (42), I+1 (45), IV (53), V-1 (62), 2 IV(78), 2 V(98), 2 III(110), I (112) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes added leaves at opening and close of codex and the separate pieces of a leaf torn in three, see pp.109-110, 111-112, 113-114).', 'Incipit: "در جفا نیست احتیار ترا آزمودم هزار بار ترا ..."', 'Title from inscription on added leaf (p.5).', 'Ms. composite codex.', 'Elegant collection (majmūʻah / mecmua) featuring poetry in Persian and Ottoman Turkish, as well samples of fine calligraphy. Contributions to the cataloguing from Yasin Şale.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 416', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; perhaps late 17th or early 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "587" inscribed in pencil on flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in purple leather ; Type III binding (without flap) in oblong or safīnah format which was perhaps originally intended to be opened vertically ; doublures / board linings in a coated paper printed with blotched design evoking marbling in dark blue and turquoise ; upper and lower covers carry tooled and gold-painted border (interlocking design flanked by fillets) and corner accents ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and cream [?], good condition ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, fully detached from text block, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (somewhat distinct) and no chain lines visible, fairly thin and transluscent though quite sturdy, mainly tinted various shades of pink, light yellow, etc. ; in what appears to be an added section, margins gold or silver-flecked and written area a contrasting shade (blue, light orange, etc.) ; endleaf and some hinges in marbled paper.', 'Decoration: Written area and divisions within defined by a gold frame consisting of gold bands (heavy and thin) defined by black fillets.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant hand in a medium line ; serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in distinct dots, point of final nūn set deep into bowl ; portions of added section in a different hand.', 'Layout: Written in roughly 20 hemistiches per page, typically arranged in 8 lines on the diagonal and 2 horizontal in the central area (or 6, 8 or 10 all on the diagonal), with 10 lines around the perimeter.', 'Collation: ii, IV (8), IV+2 (18), VII (32), 2 III(44), III+3 (53), V (63), V+2 (75), 4 V(115), IV (123) ; final leaf serves as flyleaf.', 'Explicit: "مراد عرض عبوديت ايسه زكيا ركاب ياره يو زاور شعرك ارمغان ايدرك"', 'Incipit: "كورميوب ايلك يوزين اولسون فلكده سرسرى [؟] ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of an anthology of Turkish poetry, mainly of Baki Efendi (d.1600), Sami (d.1733), etc. Contributions to the cataloguing from Hossein Mottaghi.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 239', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely 18th or 19th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "561 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on spine \'lining\' where it extends onto upper cover ; "112" inscriped in pencil at opening.', "Binding: Unbound ; leaves/'panels' were originally hinged together via green silk and adhesive ; paper has been wrapped around the long (horizontal) edge to join the leaves and form a spine ; 'panels' are delaminating and separating from one another ; some abrasion ; currently housed in envelope.", 'Support: Well-burnished laid paper set into heavy (likely thin pasteboard) painted and gold-flecked frame, edged in green silk ; colors of facing panels match (orange, purple, and green).', 'Decoration: Written area surrounded by gold-stamped border in interlocking geometric design ; written area divided into rectangular panels by gold rules ; often a white fillet appears at the center of the gold-flecked frame.', 'Script: A fine thuluth.', 'Layout: Written in two lines per page.', "Collation: Nine leaves or 'panels' originally hinged together.", 'Incipit: "رب يسر ولاتعسر رب تمم بالخير وه"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine album of calligraphy (muraqqaʻ or murakkaa) employing alphabetic exercises (müfredat).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 423', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon but decoration, paper, etc. would suggest late 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "101 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf (p.2).', 'Binding: Boards faced in red cut velvet with dark red leather over spine, fore edge flap and edges / turn-ins (velvet faced, leather edged framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings and flyleaves in a decorative paper, silver-flecked and painted with charming bird and floral motifs in gold with subtle pink and green accents ; leather framing upper and lower covers carries tooled borders (in a series of s-shaped stamps) flanking gold-painted vegetal accents and tooled rosettes ; design continues on flap ; edges of text block gold-painted with a chain design (series of s-shapes) ; sewn in dark pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with minor lifting of spine leather, abrasion and minor losses of leather from upper cover, etc.', 'Support: Mainly non-European (likely Persian) laid paper of at least three types ; opening type with roughly 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat indistinct, curving) and grouped chain lines faintly visible (see p.22, etc.), cloudy formation, thin and crisp though sturdy, well-sized and burnished, brown in color ; another type with roughly 9 laid lines per cm. (quite curved, fairly indistinct) and chain lines rarely visible (see p.114, etc.), cloudy formation, sturdy, well-sized and burnished, dark cream in color ; final type with 8-9 laid lines per cm. and no chain lines visible, quite sturdy and well-burnished, some leaves tinted bright magenta ; occasional leaves (see p.206, etc.) and opening added leaves carrying table of contents on European laid paper with 10 laid line per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-28 mm. apart (horizontal) and a raisin watermark of grapes under fleur de lis (see p.10, 16, 18, 206, etc.) ; flyleaves in European laid paper with "GFA" under eagle watermark.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.22, consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by vegetal motifs, surmounted by w-shaped piece overlaid with similar floral vegetal motifs in mint green, light pink, light blue, orange-red, and white on a ground of gold and light blue, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in light blue and red, all set in a well of pink and gold bands ; written area (and occasionally divisions within, columns otherwise divided by red rules) surrounded by frame consisting of gold band defined by black fillets ; headings and keywords rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Ottoman hand in a medium line ; serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and thickening of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in strokes (rather than distinct dots) ; a few excerpts at opening and close in other hands, mainly naskh.', 'Layout: Written in roughly 17 lines per page, mainly divided to two columns with lines of each column on the diagonal ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, II+1 (5), I+1 (8), 7 V(78), IV (86), IV+1 (95), 2 VI(119), I+1 (122), ii ; chiefly quinions with a few quaternions and senions ; catchwords present ; leaves between sections and at close originally left blank (see pp.194-200 and p.213 to close) ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Incipit: "بو مجموعۀ زيبا بر قطعۀ بهشت رعنا وبر روضۀ غناى معنا در كه ... منتخبات ازهار نامدار اثارى ايله مشكين بهار وجويبار اشعار سلامت شعارى نمونۀ جنات تجري من تحتها الانهار در حائز قصب السبق مضمار بلاغت شعر وانشا صدر اعظم واسبق مرحوم ومبرور راغب محمد باشانك دواوين عديدۀ شعراى روم بلاغت مرسوم ...', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant collection of poetic excerpts in Persian and Turkish organized according to arrangment in tables at opening (see pp.6-20), compiled by the Ottoman grand vizier and littérateur, Koca Mehmet Ragıp Paşa (d.1763).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 348', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; date accompanying seal impression and statement on 'title page' (p.1) provides terminus ante quem of 1790. Likely 18th or even late 17th century.", 'Accompanying materials: Slip with descriptive notes in hand of G. Meredith-Owens "348 An anthology of Persian poems by Tajallī and others preceded by a specimen of elegant prose. Tinted paper. Probably 18th-19th century."', 'Former shelfmark: "٣٥" in black ink on upper board lining ; "506 T.De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" on front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in marbled paper (mainly in lavender, blue, pink, and yellow) with dark brown leather over spine and edges / turn-ins (marbled paper faced and leather edged framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in orange-tinted paper ; sewn in light red thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in brown [?] and pink, fair condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, curved, somewhat indistinct) and no chain lines clearly visible, cloudy formation, thin and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished ; most leaves gold-flecked, some tinted pale yellow.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral vegetal decoration in gold on grounds of lapis lazuli, gold, pink, and turquoise surmounted by scalloped, elongated w-shaped piece (forming complete rosette) overlaid with swirling vegetal decoration in green / turquoise with red, yellow, blue and lavender floral accents on grounds of gold, lapis, pink, and turquoise with white and red accents, all bordered in a well of orange-red with white crosses ; marginal decoration on incipit and facing page in the form of vegetal designs in gold ; written area throughout surrounded by gold frame defined by black fillets and outermost blue rule with narrow gold band defining perimeter of margin.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq with some elements of shikastah ( شكسته نستعليق) ; elegant hand in a medium line ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in distinct (if occasionally conjoined) dots.', 'Layout: Initially written in 19 lines (on the diagonal) per page ; from p.41 on, divided to three columns and highly variable with as many as ten lines per column (on the diagonal).', 'Collation: iii, 2 IV(16), 3 (19), 2 IV(35), 2 III(47), II (51), 2 III (63), I+1 (66), 1 (67), iii ; an assortment chiefly of ternions and quaternions ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Incipit: "ستایش کریم سلا که حلیه حلتش زیور یست ..."', 'Title from inscription on upper board lining.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of an anthology of Persian verse, with poets usually identified.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 444', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; decoration and paper certainly suggests 18th century and date in watermark may suggest ca. 1742.', 'Former shelfmark: "465 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "234" inscribed in pencil on \'title page’.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in light brown leather with gold-tooled rule-borders ; flyleaves in gold-flecked marbled paper (in red, blue, black, grey, etc.), hinges in a different marbled paper (yellow and dark blue) ; upper and lower covers carry superb stamp and gold-painted recessed mandorla, pendants, cornerpieces, and borderpieces framed by a series of roll borders ; design continues on envelope flap ; edges of text block gold-painted with repeated strokes design ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and yellow, good condition ; overall in good condition with only minor abrasion and staining ; subtle repairs at spine (rebacked), fore edge flap and board edges in similar dark red leather gold tooled with rules and greek key pattern (compare unrepaired edges of envelope flap), as well as two fills in dark red leather on lower cover.', 'Support: European laid paper of several different types including many with raisin watermarks ; one type with 12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 21-22 mm. apart (vertical) and grapes under crown watermark ; another type with 13 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 20 mm. apart (horizontal) and watermark of grapes under cartouche with "P C" and crown above ; still another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (vertical) and watermark of grapes under long cartouche with crown above and date "1742" [?] below ; another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 21-23 mm. apart (vertical), and watermarks of lion statant guardant and cross-bow ; some leaves tinted pale orange, pink, bright yellow, buff, beige, etc.', 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on fol.1b consisting of rectangular panel with empty gold cartouche surrounded by vegetal pattern in gold with floral accents in pink and red surmounted by a scalloped rectangular piece filled with the same intricate vegetal pattern and itself surmounted by elaborate vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue, red, and gold ; the entire piece is set into a well of rich gold interlace ; a second illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) consisting of w-shaped piece of similar composition to opening headpiece appears at opening of biographical sketch on fol.6b ; written area surrounded by heavy gold frame with any divisions of the written area and margin outlined by a gold rule ; keywords, text of ḥadīth, headings, titles, etc. rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas ; in opening of "تضمين مصرع عرفى" written area gold-flecked.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Turkish hand ; mainly serifless with closed counters, descent of words to baseling, pointing in distinct dots, and elongation of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in roughly 11-17 lines per page ; roughly five lines of ḥadīth text and eight of the elucidation (on the diagonal) ; column of written area is divided to two columns to accept the lines of elucidation while ḥadīth text fills the width of the column ; biographical sketch and works of prose and verse are arranged in various layouts, including 11-13 lines per page on the diagonal filling the entire written area, 11-17 lines per page with written area divided to two columns (often alternating with a line centered or filling the column width), roughly 12 lines per page on the diagonal with written area divided to two columns, etc.', 'Collation: i, 5 V(50), I+1 (3), II (57), V (67), VII (81), IV (89), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present.', 'Incipit: "قال عليه السلام السماح رباح اى اولان كاركاه عالمده طالب وستمائة اعمال ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page'.", 'Ms. codex.', 'Stunning copy of a collection of works by Münîf of Antakya (d.1743 or 4), opening with a collection of thirty-nine ḥadīth accompanied by his Turkish paraphrase and followed by a biographical sketch for him, a collection of letters, his Zafernâme on the Belgrade campaign of 1152 [1739], and his collected poems (divan).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 398', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at close on p.56, copied by Ḥāfiẓ Muḥammad al-Balkhī with transcription completed in Bağçasaray (Bāghchahʻsarāy /باغچه سراى ), capital of the Krim Tatar state, in 1024 [1615 or 16].', 'Former shelfmark: "248 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on repair to \'title page\' (p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in marbled paper (in yellow, blue, red, and turquoise) ; upper and lower covers carry gold-tooled central ornament of interlace forming diamond shape with pendants ; sewn in white thread, two stations ; overall in poor condition with much abrasion, cracking and losses of leather, staining, etc. ; small repair to spine in red leather, also damaged.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (vertical or horizontal, somewhat distinct, some curving) and chain lines occasionally visible, cloudy formation, thin and transluscent though sturdy, dark beige in color, well-burnished ; staining and tears, repairs (fills and guards) in European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Splendid though damaged illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of large rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche defined by looping white banding with black crosses surrounded by arabesques and floral motifs in gold, red, white, pink, pistachio, etc. on grounds of gold and deep blue, bordered in a heavy band of lozenges and rosettes and surmounted by a scalloped semi-circular piece or dome with similar floral vegetal motifs on grounds of turquoise, deep blue (lapis) and gold, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue with red accents ; written area throughout surrounded by gold frame, divisions within defined by narrow gold or turquoise bands ; textual dividers in the form of turquoise inverted commas ; many headings and keywords rubricated ; several diagrams and tables outlined in gold, turquoise or red ; opening calligraphic specimen (on p.1) surrounded by marginal decoration in gold floral vegetal motifs ; written area occasionally gold-flecked (as for the calligraphic specimen on p.35 and tables and text in section following) ; illustration of rainbow (قوس قزح) on p.47.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; fine hand in a medium line ; serifless with effect of inclination to the right, descent of words to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct or conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 16 lines per page but with many diagrams and tables of varying size ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V (10), 2 IV(36), 2 (38) ; quinion and two quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "نوشته شد از براى سلطان دولت نشان ذى شان جنكيزى حفظه الله تعالى عن الافات والبليات نمقه العبد المذنب الفقير الحقير حافظ محمد البلخى وحرره بباغجه سراى المحروسه سنه ١٠٢۴"', 'Incipit: "بو منطويه آيك قنقى برجده اولدوغن بلمك طريقن بلدرر هر نيجه كون كيجسه آيدن اى اخى قوى آتك اوستينه اول دكلو در خي ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of a selection of short treatises, mainly on date calculations, calendar tables, etc. including explication (see p.9) and selections (see p.24 on) from the calendar or almanac of Şeyh Vefa (Muslihittin Mustafa, d.1490), interspersed with calligraphic specimens signed by the copyist.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 851', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.106, copied by Ömer bin Osman with transcription completed 29 Muḥarram 1093 [ca. 7 February 1682].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Part of a page taken from a book or catalogue (reverse carries image and caption) with description in black ink "Turkish MS | Miscellanies, stories and short poems, neatly copied in various handwritings. 8 vo., ms. in Turkish, native gilt binding, ?early 19th century" (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Slip with description in pencil in hand of Husselman [?] "Turkish | ʻAṭāʼī (991-1044 AH) Wrote a divan & a Khamsah. cf. BM Cat. Turk. MS. p.195. (cf. Gibb, Ottoman poems, p.207) ... Dichtkunst, v. 3, p.244 and Niẓāmī" and on reverse "ATTAY - Divan, or coll. of poems (Arabia - 17--?)" (paginated pp.3-4).', 'Binding: Pasteboards (quite thin, semi-limp) covered in dark brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in European laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry central gold-tooled ornament of geometric interlace, roughly diamond shape with pendants and radiating strokes, along with tooled and gold painted border ; red and leather onlays at head and tail of spine, accented with gold-stamped bands ; title gold stamped over green leather onlay on spine "EXTRAITS DE DIVERS OUVRAGES EN LANGUE TURQUE" ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations ; worked endbands in dark blue and cream, damaged with only traces remaining ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting of leather at spine, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper ; mainly with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of Paschal lamb in four-lobed circle (see p.54, etc.) and star above arms with three bars (see p.68, 69, etc.), well-burnished, sturdy, cream in color ; some leaves tinted pink (carrying pp.113-114, 151-152, 157-158, 167-168), mint green (carrying pp.97-98, 107-108), etc.', 'Decoration: Keywords and excerpts rubricated ; overlining in red ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Naskh and nastaʻlīq (talik) ; naskh an elegant Ottoman hand in a narrow line, mainly serifless though occasional irregular head-serif on lām or free-standing alif, slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in conjoined dots or strokes, extensively vocalized ; nastaʻlīq (talik) an elegant Ottoman hand in a medium line, serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 13-15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 2 V(20), V-1 (29), II (33), 2 V(53), IV+1 (62), V (72), V+1 (83), V (93), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تاريخ تمت الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب فى تاسع وعشرين محرم الحرام فى وقت العصر على عبد الضعيف المذنب المحتاج الى رحمة الله تعالى عمر ابن عثمان سنه ثلاث وتسعين والف"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '21. p.193-194 : [mainly blank].', '20. p.191-p.192 : [assorted excerpts].', '19. p.133-p.190 : [blank].', '18. p.131-132 : Süalname.', '17. p.129-p.130 : [blank].', '16. p.127-128 : [mesele followed by a letter of Naṣr al-Dīn to his son].', '15. p.124-p.126 : [poetic excerpt opening with"هر ايشه قيل بسمله ايله ابتدا ..."].', '14. p.118-p.123 : [blank].', '13. p.109-p.117 : [assorted prayers and excerpts, several pages left partially blank].', '12. p.108 : [chart with dates of Ottoman sultans through ascension of Süleyman II].', '11. p.107 : [blank].', '10. p.74-p.106 : Hikayet-i bazargân ba zen-i mekarih.', '9. p.68-p.73 : [blank].', '8. p.66-p.67 : [poetic excerpts].', "7. p.56-p.65 : Nefsü'l-emirname / Nevizade [?] Atâyî Efendi.", '6. p.50-p.55 : [blank].', '5. p.45-p.49 : [text opening, "الحمد لله رب العالمين وصلوة على محمد واله اجمعين راويان اخيار وثاقلان اثار شويله ..."].', "4. p.36-p.45 : Hazihi Tercümet Mukaddimetü's-salat lil-mevla el-Fenari", "3. p.28-p.35 : Hikayet-i şeyhü'l-arifin Bayezit Bistami.", '2. p.26-p.27 : [mainly blank, with excerpt].', '1. p.8-p.25 : [text opening with "روايت اولنور كه ويلايت رومده بر قاضى وار ايدى علم ايله اراست و زهد ايله براسته ايدى ..."].', 'Careful copy of a collection (mecmua / majmūʻah) of miscellaneous excerpts in prose and verse.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 421', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper would suggest first half of 17th century ; ownership statement provides terminus ante quem of 1863.', 'Former shelfmark: "533 T.De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf and opening leaf (p.2).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; doublures in dark red brown leather with delicately tooled dimond-shaped interlace central ornament and chain pendants with gold-painted rule-borders ; flyleaves and hinges now in pink-tinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry large, stamped (with recessed onlays) central mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OAi 6), pendants, and cornerpieces with gold-painted accents, as well as tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations, sewing failing ; worked chevron endbands in red and yellow, only headband and primaries remain ; overall in somewhat poor condition with loss of flap, abrasion, lifting and losses of leather (particularly spine and onlays of lower cover), cracking and delamination of boards, cover detached from text block at spine, etc. ; spine rebacked in straight-grain brown leather (repair also damaged with portion of spine lining exposed) ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with roughly 12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 23-25 mm. apart (vertical) and watermark of crossbow in circle with trefoil above (see p.14, 16, 46, 144, etc. and compare Picard nos. 123860 / Mantua 1628 and 123861 / Roverato 1624), thin crisp and transluscent though sturdy, dark cream in color, well-burnished ; flyleaves in two other European papers (inner with three crescent watermark, outer with three stars in shield watermark).', 'Decoration: Section headings and keywords rubricated ; overlining in red ink ; astronomical diagrams in red and black ink (see pp.3, 4, 5, 8, 18, 138).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Ottoman hand in a medium line ; serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing mainly in strokes (rather than distinct dots), some elongation of horizontal strokes, kāf mashqūqah (mashkūlah) preferred with dramatically sweeping shaqq, final yāʼ often mardūdah.', 'Layout: Written in as many as 23-25 lines per page, with occasional glosses on the diagonal in the margin, in two columns in some places ; sections with poetic excerpts also arranged in two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, V (10), 4 (14), V (24), II (28), III+1 (35), IV (43), 2 III(55), 2 IV(71), IV+2 (81), ii ; miscellany of quinions, ternions, quaternions, etc. ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes some flyleaves).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '21. p.154-p.162 : [assorted poetic excerpts of Adli, Fevri, etc.].', '20. p.145-p.153 : ["Hādhihi Silsilat sanadinā bi-talqīn al-dhikr al-sharīf wa-al-sirr al-laṭīf wa-al-khirqah al-mubārakah...] / ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Muḥammad ibn ʻAlī al-Bisṭāmī.', '19. p.140-p.144 : [assorted excerpts on muʻjizāt al-Nabī, ʻilm al-ḥurūf, etc.].', '18. p.138-p.140 : [astronomical work].', '17. p.137-p.138 : Şerh-i Rical-i gayb.', '16. p.136 : Fasl fi rüyet-i Allah.', '15. p.130-p.136 : Ḥall al-abyāt allatī waqaʻat fī Khizānat al-anfās al-Qudsīyah.', '14. p.127-p.129 : [assorted excerpts].', '13. p.125-p.127 : [Sharḥ Dībāchat al-Miṣbāḥ].', '12. p.121-p.125 : Dībāchah-ʼi Tārīkh-i Tāj-i Salmān.', '11. p.66-p.120 : [assorted poetic excerpts of Fevri, Şemsi, and many others].', '10. p.64-p.65 : Sūrat Alif lām mīm sharḥ Makkīyah min Tafāsīr Abū al-Saʻūd / Ebüssuud Efendi.', '9. p.54-p.63 : [assorted poetic excerpts of Nati, etc.].', '8. p.40-p.53 : [Qaṣīdat al-Burdah with interlinear and marginal takhmīs].', '7. p.31-p.40 : [assorted poetic excerpts of Niẓāmī, Figanî Ramazan Çelebi, etc.].', '6. p.25-p.30 : [assorted excerpts].', '5. p.19-p.24 : Haza Kitab-ı Sultan Mahmut.', '4. p.18 : Der beyan-ı kavis-i kuzah.', '3. p.9-p.18 : Der beyan-ı menazil-i kamer.', '2. p.5-p.8 : Der beyan-ı eflak ve menzil-i büruc.', '1. p.4 : Der beyan-ı seyr-i eflak ve nücum.', 'Careful copy of a collection (mecmua / majmūʻah ) of excerpts and brief works on astronomy, tafsīr, grammar, Ṣūfī thought, etc. along with a great assortment of poetic excerpts, mainly in Turkish but also in Arabic and Persian. Additional excerpts appear in the margins.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 390', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.37, copied by Osman el-Üveysi (ʻUthmān al-Uwaysī), disciple of Dedezade, with transcription completed 1168 [1754 or 5].', 'Former shelfmark: "326 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings and flyleaves in dark olive green surface-dyed paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped (red leather recessed onlays) and gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OAi 12), pendants and cornerpieces with tooled and gold-painted accents and border (rules defining a gullioché roll) ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn in red thread, six stations ; overall in somewhat poor condition, fully detached from the text block, with some abrasion, lifting of leather, losses of spine leather (at head and tail where primaries may have been stitched through the spine lining at least), leather burn from envelope flap on upper board lining and front flyleaf, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with roughly 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct, some curving) and occasional irregular chain lines visible, dark cream to beige in color, crisp and transluscent though sturdy, burnished ; flyleaves in European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2, consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral motifs in pink, orange and red on a gold ground, surmounted by w-shaped piece filled with swirling floral vegetal composition mainly in gold and pink with red and orange accents on a gold ground, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in a faint blue, entire piece set in a well of pink and gold bands ; written area surrounded by gold frame defined by black fillets, divisions within surrounded by narrow gold bands outlined by black fillets ; section headings chrysographed.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; spacious, elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page, mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 2 V(20), i ; two quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "كتبه العبد الضعيف السيد عثمان الاويسى خادم خرقۀ شريف من تلاميذ دده زاده غفر ذنوبه وستر عيوبه سنه ١١٦٨"', 'Explicit: "اكا رحمت قله خلاق عالم اوقويه فاتحه والله اعلم اوقويانى يازنى دكليانى رحمتكله يارلغه غل ياغنى فاعلات فاعلات فاعلات بيك ... صلوات"', 'Incipit: "دلا ذكر ايله اول رب رحيمى دى بسم الله الرحمن الرحيمى ... سبب تاليف كتاب كل ايمدى دكله اى عارف بو مابى ... بزم كيم شيخم ويس القرندر كونشدن روشن فخر ارندر ... اوقويالر بو نظم دلكشايى دعادن اكلمه جان صبايى ... اول اقليم مبارك كيم يمندر انك بر كويى وار ادى قرندر ..."', 'Title from inscription on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the hagiographical work in verse relating the legend of the life and merits of Uways al-Qaranī [Üveys el-Karani] (d.657) by Sabâyî Hayrettin Çelebi Edirnevî.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 424', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.197, transcription completed by the author in Muḥarram 1216 [May-June 1801]. A note on the \'title page\' (p.1), "مترجم مرحوم خطيله", also indicates that the manuscript is in the hand of the author.', 'Former shelfmark: "329 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap), likely two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; board linings and flyleaves in orange-tinted, silver-flecked European laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry exquisite stamped mandorla (gold-painted recessed onlays, vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. NSd 7) and pendants, as well as gold-tooled accents and guilloché roll border ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, fairly good condition with tailband and primaries detaching from textblock but still well-attached to spine lining ; overall in good condition with only minor abrasion, some lifting of spine leather, spine lining detached from most of text block, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly indistinct, curved), no chain lines visible, cloudy formation with fibers and inclusions visible, quite sturdy, transluscent and crisp, highly sized and burnished, beige to light brown in color ; board linings and flyleaves in European laid paper with large scrollwork watermark (difficult to make out).', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of the preface on p.2, consisting of scalloped w-shaped piece with gold cartouche (carrying the title "مرح المعالى فى شرح الامالى" in white) surrounded by swirling floral vegetal decoration in gold with red, blue, and light blue accents on a gold ground, entire piece set in an elaborate well of pink, black and light blue bands flanking a heavy band of gold interlace with red and turquoise accents and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and red ; second superb illuminated headpiece at opening of the main text ( beginning with introduction, مقدمۀ كتاب) on p.8 ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by heavy gold frame with divisions within defined by narrow gold bands ; elsewhere written area (and divisions within) surrounded by light blue (evoking silver) band defined by inner and outer red rules ; keywords and text being commented upon rubricated ; overlining in red ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; compact hand in a heavy line ; serifless, with effect of words inclining to the right and descending to baseline, closed counters, elongated horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots ; text being commented upon fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V+1 (11), 9 V(101), i ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages each between pp.9-10 and 183-184).', 'Dedication: As appears in opening matter (preface, see p.5) dedicated to Sultan Selim III (r.1709-1807).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular reads "نجز بقلم شارحه الحقير فى م سنه ١٢١٦"', 'Explicit: "مفهوم بيت بو در كه بر كمسنه بنم ايچون بر كون كه مراد بر وقتدر دعاى خير ايدرسه مدت عمرمده زمايت قدرتمى آنك خير دعاسنده افراغ ايدرم فنرجو من الله العميم المراحم البسيط المكارم ان يعفو عنا وعن الناظم ويرحمنا ويرحمه ويرحم آبائنا وامهاتنا ومشايخنا واحبائنا وجميع المؤمنين بحرمة رسوله الامين ولله الحمد اولا واخرا"', 'Incipit: "سبحان من توحد فى ذاته القديم سبحان من تفرد فى وصفته القويم ... اما بعد صورت مقدمۀ اتيه ده بيان اولنديغى اوزره جملۀ علوم شريفه وجلمۀ فنون منيفه دن علم كلام ايله معلم اولان ... بو عبد مكزين يعنى در مائده اواصر قواصم السيد احمد عاصم جعله الله من عصبة المعاصم ... شرح وامل سنه وضع قلم ابتدا اولنوب اسلوب مطلوب ومنهج مرغوب اوزره توفيق رب منعامله قرين حسن ختام ومرح المعالى فى شرح الامالى ايله بنام ..."', 'Title from illuminated headpiece at opening on p.2 and in opening matter on p.4.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant, apparently autograph copy of the commentary by the celebrated Ottoman offical historiographer (vak’anüvîs / vakanüvîs) Ahmet Asım Efendi, also known as Mütercim Asım (d.1820) on al-Ūshī's (fl. 12 cent.) renowned theological poem in lām, Badʼ al-amālī or Qaṣīdat yaqūlu al-ʻabd fī badʻ al-amālī."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 833', 'Origin: As appears at close on p.281, dated 28 Dhū al-Qaʻdah 1279 [ca. 17 May 1863].', "Binding: Boards covered in textured, coated black paper with red leather over spine and corners of boards (barely, not quite half-binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in printed 'marbled' paper (mainly in dark blue, pink and yellow) ; spine gold-stamped with vegetal designs and lines along ridges ; sewn in yellow thread, five stations, over cords ; stuck-on endbands ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, etc.", 'Support: Machine laid paper (faux laid wove) with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of "L J D," thin, transluscent, and quite well-burnished, tinted blue.', 'Decoration: Headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of rural scene with canon on rolling hills set in a crescent flanked by assorted arms / weapons ; keywords, section headings, numerals and other symbols rubricated ; numerous line-drawings and diagrams (in pencil and black and red inks) illustrating text.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; clear Turkish hand ; serifless with slight effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, freely ligatured, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in as many as 23 lines per page, though varies considerably depending on number of diagrams, mathematical problems, etc. ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 14 V(140), I (142), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Incipit: "مقدمه علم حكمت طبيعيه علوم طبيعيه نك ..."', 'Title from rubricated heading at opening (p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of an Ottoman physics (physical science or natural sciences, i.e. hikmet-i tabiiye) textbook of uncertain authorship.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 406', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.17, copied by Mehmet bin Mahmut (Muḥammad ibn Maḥmūd), a student of Süleyman Efendi of Üsküdar (سليمان افندى الاسكدارى), with date transcription completed not specified ; decoration, paper, etc. suggest 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "361 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in quite dark brown (to black) leather and now edged in dark maroon leather (likely repair) ; now Type III binding (without flap) but not flush with text block ; pastedowns and flyleaves in bright spring green surface-dyed wove paper ; upper and lower covers carry heavily recessed stamped and gold-painted scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal decoration, compare Déroche class. NSd 9) and pendants, with gold-painted accents and tooled border ; sewn in heavy yellow thread, four stations ; overall in good condition with only minor abrasion (mainly at spine and board edges), etc. ; evidence of envelope flap on opening leaf indicates that this cover once had a flap or text block was once covered in a different binding (with a flap).', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, indistinct, some curving) and no chain lines visible, crisp, well-burnished, sturdy, beige / buff in color.', 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying the title in white (هذا مولود شريف) surrounded by swirling floral vegetal decoration and chi clouds in gold, lavender, red, white, and turquoise (light blue-green) on fields of dark cream with gold accents and lapis lazuli, surmounted by scalloped w-shaped piece filled with similar floral vegetal and chi cloud motifs, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh), entire piece surrounded by border or well in red with white accents ; illuminated floral motifs set off headings and colophon ; written area surrounded by heavy gold frame outlined by black fillets with outermost blue rule ; section headings and musical annotations in margins rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand ; partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on lām, ṭāʼ, ẓāʼ but not alif, effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders (some sweeping, final nūn, etc.), rightward descenders tapered, mainly open counters, pointing in distinct dots ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; divided to two columns to set off poetry ; section headings centered ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, IV+2 (10), ii ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing (skips opening leaf).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "الحمد لله الذي وقفني لكتابة مولود شريف ويسرني بفضله اتمام تنميقه كتبه الحقير المحتاج الى رحمة ربه المعبود محمد بن محمود من تلاميذ سليمان افندى الاسكدارى حامدا الله تعالى ومصليا على نبيه محمد واله اجمعين الطاهرين"', 'Explicit: "كرديلر سز بوله سز اوتدن نجات عشقله درديله ايدك الصلوة ... امتك اولدوغمز دولت يتر خدمتك قلديغمز عزت يتر ... امتدن راضى اولسون اول معين رحمت الله عليهم اجمعين"', 'Incipit: "الله ادين ذكر ايده لم اولا واجب اولدر جمله اشده هر قولا ..."', 'Title from headpiece at opening (p.2) and colophon (p.17).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the famous poem in praise of the Prophet by Süleyman Çelebi of Bursa (d.1422?). Contributions to the cataloguing by Mehmet Uğur Ekinci.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 278', 'Origin: Neither signed nor dated ; decoration, paper, etc. may suggest late 18th or 19th century, though possibly later.', 'Former shelfmark: "107" inscribed in pencil at opening ; "563 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" in pencil on lower pastedown.', 'Binding: Boards (quite stiff) covered in tan and red brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns / doublures and flyleaves in block-printed faux marbled paper (evoking shell pattern in blue, green, yellow and orange) ; upper and lower covers carry stamped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition, compare Déroche OSd 8), pendants and cornerpieces, with tooled and gold-painted borders ; panels hinged together with brown leather ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper, written area well-burnished and surface-dyed shades of beige, pale yellow, etc., pieced and set in borders mainly of block-printed faux marbled paper (evoking shell pattern in blue, green, yellow and orange) and all mounted on dense boards ; border for opening panel in a true marbled paper.', "Decoration: Written area surrounded by 'gold'-painted frame defined by black fillets and mounted in borders mainly of block-printed faux marbled paper.", 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; large, exquisite calligraphic hand in a bold line.', 'Layout: Written in 4 lines per page with logograph for "سعي" under each line ; frame-ruled.', "Collation: Three 'panels' (mounted leaves) hinged together with brown leather.", 'Incipit: "ا ب ج د ر د ر س ش ص ط ع ف ق ك ك ل م ن و ه لا ى ي ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine album of calligraphy (muraqqaʻ / murakkaâ), namely pieces from a meşk murakkaa carrying alphabetic exercises (müfredat) through the letter sīn. Final piece incomplete with further excercises (mashq) on the reverse.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 905', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.122, transcription of opening work completed 13 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1357, corresponding to 2 February 1939. As appears in colophon on p.740, transcription of final work completed 17 Jumādá II, corresponding to 3 August and 17 Abīb, presumably of 1358 [1939] by a copyist who identifies himself only as "ا ع." Likely bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 54', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title, author and owner, as well as decorative accents over raised bands "مفتاح غيب الجمع والوجود القونوي | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine but appears to be over cords, in white thread, five stations ; stuck-on endbands ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper of at least two different types.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, modern hand ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 26 lines per page.', 'Collation: Pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: [Miftāḥ ghayb al-jamʻ wa-al-wujūd] "Scribal," rectangular, reads "وكان الفراغ من تسويد هذا المتن العجيب الغريب في ١٣ من ذي الحجة ١٣٥٧ المطابق الثاني من شهر فبراير ١٩٣٩" ; [al-Risālah al-ʻArshīyah] "Scribal," triangular, reads "حرره العبد الفقير الذليل ... المسمى اع في اليوم السابع عشر من جمادى الثانية الموافق الثالث من اغسطس السابع عشر من ابيب ... امين"', 'Incipit: [Miftāḥ ghayb al-jamʻ wa-al-wujūd] "اللهم احمد نفسك عمن امرته ان يتخذك وكيلا حمدا عائدا منك اليك متحدا بك لا منقسما ولا مفصولا ..." ; [Sharḥ al-Ishārāt wa-al-tanbīhāt] "قال الشيخ الرئيس ابي علي الحسين بن علي بن سينا هذه اشارات الى اصول وتنبيهات على جمل يستبصر بها من تيسر له ولا ينتفع بالاصرح منها من تعسرت عليه والتكلان على التوفيق ..." ; [Risālat al-Mashāʻir] "هذه رسالة المشاعر لصدر المتأهلين ... وهو المعروف بملا صدرا ... بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم نحمد الله ونستعين بقوته التي اقام بها ملكوت السموات والارضين وبكلمته التي انشأ بها نشأتي الاولى ويوم الدين على تهذيب القوى القابلة للاستكمال ..." ; [al-Risālah al-ʻArshīyah] "هذه هي الرسالة الموسومة بالعرشية لصدر المتألهين ... بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الحمد لله الذي جعلنا ممن شرح صدره للاسلام فهو على نور من ربه ... اما بعد فيقول العبد الذليل المفتقر الى عفو ربه الجليل محمد المدعو بصدر الدين ... هذه رسالة وجيزة اذكر فيها طائفة من المسائل الربوبية ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '6. p.673-p.740 : al-Risālah al-ʻArshīyah / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī.', '5. p.625-p.673 : Risālat al-Mashāʻir / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī.', '4. p.622-p.624 : [blank].', '3. p.125-p.621 : Sharḥ al-Ishārāt wa-al-tanbīhāt al-raʼīsīyah / Naṣīr al-Dīn al-Ṭūsī.', '2. p.123-p.124 : [blank].', '1. p.1-p.122 : Miftāḥ ghayb al-jamʻ wa-al-wujūd / Muḥammad ibn Isḥāq Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Qūnawī.', "Careful copy of Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Qūnawī's (d.1274) chief philosophical work with preface from Muḥammad ibn Ḥamzah al-Fanārī's commentary Miṣbāḥ al-uns bayna al-maʻqūl wa-al-mashhūd, followed by Naṣīr al-Dīn al-Ṭūsī's (d.1274) commentary on Ibn Sīnā's (d.1037) al-Ishārāt wa-al-tanbīhāt, and Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī's (d.1641) Risālat al-Mashāʻir and al-Ḥikmah al-ʻarshīyah (al-Risālah al-ʻArshīyah)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 993', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 142', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "مفتاح غيب الجمع والوجود | J.H.D." ; sewn in white thread over three recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Machine laid and wove paper of several types ; opening and later sections (mainly pp.2-56, 141-172) in a machine laid paper with watermarks of arms / scrollwork with seated Britannia under crown (see pp.2, 141, 156, etc.) and "HERTFORDSHIRE MILLS" (see pp.20, 143, etc.) ; other sections on a ruled wove paper (see pp.57-104, 311-340) ; still other sections (see pp.107-140,217-224, 341-372) in a machine wove type with watermarks (in a few instances seeming embossed, see p.114, etc.) of what appears to be a head portrait (bordered in branches with a ribbon) and tuğra / ṭughrā of the sultan ; pp.245-292 in still another type with watermark of "GOUVERNEMENT EGYPTIEN" with star and crescent at center and other smaller crescents with three stars (see pp.246, 258, 262, etc. and compare Walz, "The Paper trade of Egypt and the Sudan," p.91).', 'Decoration: Headings, keywords, symbols, vocalization and glosses rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant modern hand in a medium line ; partially but irregularly seriffed with effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, many open counters, pointing in conjoined dots, final yāʼ usually left unpointed, fully vocalized in some sections ; glosses and closing portions of the matn in ruqʻah.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 9-13 lines per page with gloss in varying number of lines in the margins.', 'Collation: i, 7 II(28), 3 IV(52), V (62), IV (80), 7 II(98), 7 IV(154), V (164), III (170), 2 IV(186), i ; chiefly binions and quaternions ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals in pencil in the lower margin of the opening recto of almost every gathering ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: [Miftāḥ ghayb al-jamʻ wa-al-wujūd] "والصون الذي بين يديها فمن [وفق] في فعل او قول فانت الذي وفقته وسددته"', 'Incipit: [Miftāḥ ghayb al-jamʻ wa-al-wujūd] "اللهم احمد نفسك عمن امرته ان يتخذك وكيلا حمدا عائدا منك اليك متحدا بك لا منقسما ولا مفصولا ... وبعد فالعلوم منها امهات اصلية" ; [Miṣbāḥ al-uns] "سبحانك اللهم وبحمدك حمدا يرتضيه ذاتك الذي لا يحوم حول عزه الاحمى ذكر ولا عبارة ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1) and rubricated heading at opening on p.2.", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Qūnawī’s (d.1274) chief philosophical work, extensively glossed, with preface from Muḥammad ibn Ḥamzah al-Fanārī’s commentary Miṣbāḥ al-uns bayna al-maʻqūl wa-al-mashhūd.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 322', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.425, copied by Naʻīm al-Dīn ibn Munʻim al-Dīn al-Awhadī with transcription completed 933 [1526 or 7] likely in Shīrāz.', 'Former shelfmark: "183 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on upper pastedown ; "١٥١" on tail edge of text block.', 'Binding: Thin pasteboards covered in dark red brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in gold-flecked, lavender and pink-tinted European laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry gold-tooled guilloché roll border ; sewn in dark blue-green thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pale yellow and pink, fair condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of spine leather, delamination of boards, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical, indistinct) and chains faintly visible (horizontal), cloudy formation, fairly transluscent, quite sturdy, well-burnished, dark cream in color ; pastedowns / flyleaves in European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of large scrollwork / arms design with lion rampant on triple mount at center and crown above ; some staining and tidelines.', 'Decoration: Exquisite double-page illumination at opening on pp.4-5 consists of rectangular panels carrying opening text set off by cloud-bands with upper and lower cartouches carrying the title and author ("مهر و مشترى من منظومات مولانا محمد عصار عليه الرحمه و المغفره") in white all surrounded by elegant swirling vegetal composition with floral accents in gold, pink, red, yellow, white, light blue, etc. on fields of gold and lapis lazuli evoking book cover design, surrounded by elaborate scalloped border evoking a series of domes accented with perpendicular stalks [tīgh] at the apices of the scallops and filled with continuation of the vegetal design on fields of gold and lapis lazuli ; written area (and columns within) surrounded by gold frame defined by black fillets ; keywords and headings chrysographed ; four miniatures in Shīrāz style (see p.31, p.110, p.327, and p.364 ; examined by Priscilla Soucek April 1969, see note on catalog card "Painting in Shiraz style. The scribe is of a scribal family [Mrs. Sucek 4-9-69]").', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant Persianate hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 22 lines per page with written area mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, IV-1 (7), 10 IV(87), IV-1 (94), 3 IV(118), IV-1 (125), 10 IV(205), IV+1 (214), i ; exclusively quaternions (several anomalous) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf and skips two pages each between pp.347-348 and 373-374, leaf carrying pp.241-242 was misplaced when paginated but is now properly placed between pp.248-249).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, in Arabic, reads "تم الكتاب على يد افقر عباد الله الغنى نعيم الدين بن منعم الدين الاوحدى فى ٩٣٣"', 'Explicit: "بختم انبیا و ختم قرآن که ختم کار ما بر خیر گردان"', 'Incipit: "بنام پادشاه عالم عشق که نامش هست نقش خاتم عشق ..."', 'Title from exquisite double-page illumination at opening (pp.4-5).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Splendid copy of the story of pure love between Mihr and Mushtarī, a mas̲navī by Mawlānā Muḥammad ʻAṣṣār of Tabrīz. Illustrated with four miniatures in Shīrāz style (see p.31, p.110, p.327, and p.364).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 944', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.235, second work copied by Sulaymān al-Khwājah ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Khwājah al-Bujayrimī [al-Bujayramī] with date of completion not specified. Paper, hand, etc. would suggest late 18th or 19th century. Opening work lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests 19th century.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 93', 'Binding: Boards covered in black cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; resewn in white thread, eight stations ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "كلام علي ابن ابي طالب متن التلخيص" ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion.', 'Support: European laid paper of two types ; opening type with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 29 mm. apart (vertical), and traces of crescent in shield watermark (see pp.2, 6, 16, 20, Nikolaev no.959, Walz p.89), quite crisp though fairly thick and sturdy ; second type with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 27 mm. apart (vertical), three crescents watermark (perpendicular to chains, see pp.26, 30-31, etc.), and "EA" [?] countermark (see pp.64, 68, etc.), well-burnished (some leaves to glossy), fairly sturdy, cream in color ; staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated in second work (with text to be entered in red typically indicated in margins) ; some overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; two main hands ; opening work in a clear though initially somewhat awkward hand in a medium line, partially but irregularly seriffed with effect of titlt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots ; second work in a clear, spacious hand (likely Egyptian with Turkish features) in a medium line, seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on most ascenders (even free-standing alif), slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 13 and 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, 11 V(110), IV (118), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; quire numbering in the form of ك above Hindu-Arabic numeral in the upper outer margin of the opening recto of each quire in the second work ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: [Matn al-Talkhīṣ] "Scribal," triangular, reads "تم كتاب متن التلخيص بحمد الله وعونه على يد الفقير الى مولاه سليمان الخواجه ابن عبد الرحمن الخواجه البجيرمي وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم"', 'Explicit: [Min kalām ʻAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib] "يسود المرء قوم بالاحسان اليهم ياس القلب راحة النفس تم بحمد الله وعونه وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم" ; [Matn al-Talkhīṣ] "واردة على احسن الوجوه واكملها يظهر ذلك بالشامل مع التذكر لما تقدم ان شاء الله تعالى"', 'Incipit: [Min kalām ʻAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib] "قال علي عليه الرضوان إيمان المرء يعرف بأيمانه أخوك من وأوساك في الشدة إظاهر الغنى من الشكر ..." ; [Matn al-Talkhīṣ] "الحمد لله على ما انعم وعلم من البيان ما لم نعلم والصلوة على سيدنا محمد خير من نطق بالصواب ... اما بعد فلما كان علم البلاغة و توابعها من اجل العلوم قدرا و ادقها سرا ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '3. p.21-p.235 : Hādhā Matn Talkhīṣ al-Miftāḥ mushtamil ʻalá thalāthat funūn al-Maʻānī wa-al-Bayān wa-al-Badīʻ / Jalāl al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Qazwīnī.', '2. p.17-p.20 : [blank].', '1. p.1-p.16 : Min kalām al-Imām ʻAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib /ʻAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib; Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥusayn al-Sharīf al-Raḍī.', 'Composite manuscript opening with maxims (amthāl) attributed to ʻAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib and arranged in alphabetical order, followed by Talkhīṣ al-Miftāḥ, the abridgement of Jalāl al-Dīn al-Qazwīnī (d. 1338), Khaṭīb Dimashq, of the third part of Miftāḥ al-ʻulūm by Yūsuf ibn Abī Bakr al-Sakkākī (d. 626/1229) on rhetoric (ʻilm al-maʻānī wa-al-bayān).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 649', 'Origin: As appears at close on p.69 (in what seems to be a different hand), transcription completed end of Ṣafar 1011 [August 1602].', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and label on lower cover, "IL 356" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (in dark blue, green, red, yellow, and orange on white) with spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins in light brown leather (framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in orange-tinted laid paper ; sewn in light yellow thread, four stations, many threads broken ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, minor lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; fully detached from text block.', 'Support: European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-29 mm. apart (horizontal), and anchor in circle with leaf above watermark (50 mm. tall, see pp.6-7, etc.) ; well-burnished to glossy, sturdy.', 'Decoration: Headings and keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', "Script: Naskh ; clear Egyptian or 'Syrian' hand in a medium line ; virtually serifless with curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots, hamzah used (al-hamzah al-mutawassiṭah al-maksūrah appears seated to the right of the pointed yāʼ, e.g. opening on p.18), occasional vocalization.", 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: III (6), 2 V(26), IV+1 (35) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (before collation and while quires were out of order with second and third quire switched ; during collation correct pagination was added).', 'Colophon: [al-Maqāmah al-yāqūtīyah] "Scribal," reads "تمت بحمد الله وعونه وحسن توفيقه والحمد لله وحده وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وسلم بتاريخ اواخر صفر الخير سنة احد عشر والف"', 'Incipit: [al-Maqāmah al-tuffāḥīyah] "قال مولانا شيخ الحديث جلال الدين رحمه الله سألت طائفة فاقهة عن مناقب الفاكهة وصفاتها المشاكهة ..." ; [al-Maqāmah al-zumurrudīyah fī al-khaḍrawāt] "قال مولانا شيخ الحديث جلال الدين السيوطي رحمه الله سأل سائل عن اهل الوسائل من يقصد في المسائل ويرصد لديوان الرسائل عن الخضروات السبعة ..." ; [al-Maqāmah al-fustuqīyah] "قال مولانا الشيخ جلال الدين السيوطي مرت من النقول طائفة على النقول عائفة تروم الافصاح عن منافعها والايضاح ..." ; [ al-Maqāmah al-yāqūtīyah ] "قال مولانا شيخ الحديث جلال الدين السيوطي اجتمع سبعة من اليواقيت لبضعة من المواقيت ..."', "Title from inscription on upper cover ; title for each maqāmah found on its respective 'title page' (p.1, 17, 27, 39).", 'Ms. codex.', '6. p.70 : [blank].', '4. p.[49]-p.69 : al-Maqāmah al-yāqūtīyah / al-Suyūṭī.', '3. p.[48] : [blank].', '2. p.[39]-p.[47] : al-Maqāmah al-fustuqīyah / al-Suyūṭī.', '5. p.[23]-p.[38] : al-Maqāmah al-zumurrudīyah fī al-khaḍrawāt / al-Suyūṭī.', '1. p.1-p.[22] : al-Maqāmah al-tuffāḥīyah / al-Suyūṭī.', 'Fine copy of a selection of four of the maqāmāt composed by the famous and prolific author and scholar, al-Suyūṭī (d.1505). The maqāmāt here address fruits, vegetables, nuts, and precious stones.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1028', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; hand, paper, etc. would certainly suggest 18th century and dated watermark may suggest ca. 1757.', 'Accompanying materials: Small scrap torn from a printed Arabic page (between pp.106-107).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 177', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in block-printed paper (now gray on yellow) with red leather over spine and edges / turn-ins (decorative paper faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; possibly once Type II binding (with flap, though now lost [?]), likely two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; board linings in block-printed paper (silver on dark blue) ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and light blue, damaged with some thread losses and cores exposed ; overall in poor condition with upper cover and first few gatherings fully detached, moisture damage, staining, abrasion, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of a few different types ; opening type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 24-26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of horn / bugle in arms / shield with crown above (see p.4, 46, 55, 190-191, etc.) and of "... P ACHARD EN DAUPHINE 17[5?]7" (see p.10, 36, 50-51, 116, etc.), sturdy and well-burnished, dark cream in color ; another type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of grapes with stem under crown (see p.82, 90-91, 118, 178, 310, etc.), well-burnished, beige in color ; final quires on a type with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark (about 120 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.414, 440, etc.), sturdy, fairly thick and cream in color.', 'Decoration: Section headings, notabilia and some keywords rubricated, others overlined in red ; textual dividers in the form of red hāʼ ; written area of incipit page surrounded by red double rule-border ; text being commented upon overlined in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; two main hands ; opening hand through p.407 a compact, neat naskh in a thin line, partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping tear-drop head-serif on occasional free-standing alif, lām, etc., curvilinear descenders, slight effect of tilt to the left, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ unpointed ; from p.408 to close a compact, crowded naskh in a thin line, partially but irregularly seriffed with effect of tilt to the left, quite rounded with curvlinear descenders, pointing in distinct or conjoined dots, bar of kāf (shaqq) sweeping dramatically, point of final nūn set deep in bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 23 and 26-31 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 20 V(200), II+1 (205), 5 V(255), III (261) ; almost exclusively quinions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of double stroke looking like "٧" in upper outer corner of left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (drops ten pages by following p.455 with p.446).', 'Explicit: "يوصل الى قبر عثمان ابن عفان ويزوره ويدعو الله ويسأل حاجته بحرمته ويستغفر الله العظيم من جميع زلاته ونقصانه ويدعو لوالديه واخوانه وجميع المؤمنين والحمد لله اولا واخرا وظاهرا وباطنا وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله واصحابه وازواجه وذرياته وعلى جميع اخوانه من النبيين والصديقين والشهداء والصالحين والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "قال مولانا وسيدنا الامام العلامة ... محمد بن عبد الله بن احمد بن محمد بن ابراهيم التمرتاشي الغزي ان اجدر الخ رب يسر وتمم بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم ... ان اجدر ما افتتحت به الكتب والدفاتر ... حمد الله الذي رفع معالم الدين واعلا مناره ... اما بعد فيقول العبد الغريق في بحار الخطاء ... محمد بن عبد الله ... ان اعز ما ... الذليل في تحصيله ويرام ... علم الفقه الذي يقوم به العباد المصالح ... فالفت مختصرا جامعا لجملة من المتون المشهورة ... وسميته بتنوير الابصار وجامع البحار ثم لما افرغته في قالب التحرير والتمام ... سنح لي ان اكتب عليه شرحا لطيفا يحل مشكلاته ... عازما على ان اسميه بعد تمامه بمنح الغفار شرح تنويف الابصار ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.3.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the first volume of Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd Allāh al-Timirtāshī's own commentary upon his compendium of Ḥanafī law, Tanwīr al-abṣār wa-jāmiʻ al-biḥār."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 567', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.123a, copying completed ("kāna al-farāgh min hādhihi al-nuskhah al-mubārakah...") mid-afternoon Thursday, 22 Rabīʻ I 1116 [ca. 25 July 1704]. Copyist is not named.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From pasted label on lower cover and inscription on front flyleaf "IL 360" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather; Type III binding (without flap); upper and lower covers carry simple blind-tooled and scored lines; doublures of block-printed paper with lined floral pattern in green and pink; pasted label with shelfmark; in fair to good condition.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper; somewhat thin with many undissolved fibers; laid lines running horizontally and spaced roughly 6-7 laid lines per cm. and no chain lines visible; leaves of final quire appear to be of a different laid paper with laid lines running vertically and spaced roughly 8-9 laid lines per cm.; flyleaves of heavier laid paper.', 'Decoration: Text of matn rubricated with sharḥ in black ; also words such "قلت" and "فان قلت" marking the dialogic relationship between this gloss and text and some overlinings in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; mainly fine, neat Persianate hand with a very slight tilt to the left, swooping tails of final nūn, etc. and mostly closed counters, partially seriffed with lām of definite article occasionlly bearing right sloping head serif, alif of lām alif ligature occasionally bearining left sloping head serif, etc., upward-spiraling hāh mudghamah (muʻallaqah) found occasionally throughout, kāf mashkūlah preferred ; at fol.62b and fol.82b, line and thickness changes though same hand apparent ; hand changes at fol.106a and final leaves (including colophon) are supplied in a nastaʻlīq.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page.', 'Collation: 12 V (120), I+1 (123); chiefly quinions followed by a binion with added singleton; traces of quire numbering in the form of full words on the upper outer margin of the recto of the first folio of certain quires; catchwords present; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (referenced in cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Authorial" followed by "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "قال مصنفه وهذا اخر ما كتبناه في شرح الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب والحمد لله رب العالمين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين وسلم تسليما كثيرا وكان الفراغ من هذه النسخة المباركة يوم الخميس وقت العصر في شهر ربيع الاول عدد ايام الشهر ٢٢ في سنة ١١١٦"', 'Explicit: "وهو مولانا فنعم المولى ونعم النصير وهو على كل شيء قدير"', 'Incipit: "وبه ثقتي ان اجري ما يملي في تباشير الخطب والدبابيج واحسن ما يتلي في صحائف مصابيح الدياجير والدبابيج [كذا] ... اما بعد فان العبد الفقير الى ربه الغني ابا محمد محمود بن احمد بن العيني ... يقول لما وقعت في الديار المصرية ... ورايت الترك منكبتين على المختصر الموسوم بتحفة الملوك ... وانه محتاج الى الشرح والايضاح والبيان والافصاح اردت ان ادون له شرحا ... مترجما بكتاب منحة السلوك شرح تحفة الملوك"', 'Title from opening on fol.1b-2a.', 'Ms. codex.', "Commentary on Tuḥfat al-mulūk, al-Rāzī's treatise on Ḥanafī law."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 385', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.144, copied by Mustafa Asım, grandson of Rasihzade (Rasihzade Hafîdi Mustafa Asım), with transcription completed in the first part of Ṣafar 1262 [January 1846].', 'Former shelfmark: "348 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.2).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in light brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in dark red leather with gold-painted central mandorla and pendants ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal composition compare Déroche class. NSd 7), pendants and cornerpieces along with tooled border in gold ; sewn now in light brown thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and pink, good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, moisture damage, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, etc. ; repairs to fore edge flap in recycled finished leather (gold-painted and tooled), repair to spine in black leather, fill for onlay of cornerpiece in upper cover from recycled finished leather (stamped), rehinged ; cover likely much earlier than transcript / text block and here recycled.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, somewhat distinct, curved) and no chain lines visible, cloudy formation, inclusions visible, crisp and sturdy, highly sized and burnished to glossy, buff colored.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and notabilia rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; compact, elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, elongated horizontal strokes, pointing in conjoined dots ; partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off verses ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V+1 (11), 6 V(71), I (73) ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على سيدنا محمد سيد الاولين والآخرين وعلى اله واصحابه وعترته الطاهرين وعلى سائر الانبياء والمرسلين وقد وقع الفراغ عن التحرير والتزبير بعون الله الملك القدير راسخ زاده حفيدى مصطفى عاصم غفر الله ذنوبهم وستر عيوبهم فى اوائل صفر الخير المنسلك بسلك سنه اثنى وستين ومائتين بعد الالف"', 'Explicit: "بو مختصر رسالۀ مرآت الصفا بهم نشيدۀ شيرازۀ جمع وتنميق اولمق ... زبان عبد فقير كوهركش رشتۀ اولديغى الفوايح النبويه فى السير المصطفويه نام كتاب صحت نصاب عمدۀ اهتمامنه تحميل اولندى والله يهدى الى سواء السبيل وهو حسبى ونعم الوكيل"', 'Incipit: "پیشكاه باركاه كبريا بيناهيه [بى نهايه] از سرا جلال وتعظيم حمد وسپاس بى قياس تقديم اولنوب ... حقير قره چلبي زاده عبد العزيز فقير اولدركه بو ايام فاضلۀ ... مناقب سعادت عواقب رسل كرام ... فرائد الفوائد مرآت الصفا نام نام درج الدررده اولنوب ..."', 'Title from opening on p.3 and close on p.143.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the work on the sīrah of the Prophet by Karaçelebizade Abdülaziz Efendi (d.1658).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 88', 'Origin: As appears in scribal colophon on p.631, transcription completed ("wa-qad tamma taswīd al-kitāb...") Monday 17 Rabīʻ I 1135 [ca. 26 December 1722]. Preceding authorial colophon (also on p.631) indicates that composition was completed on the 27th night of Ramaḍān 850 [ca. 16 December 1446].', 'Accompanying materials: Slip with notes inserted between pp.126-127 (not paginated).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 120. Mirat al-usul."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (blue, orange, yellow, mauve, etc.) with spine, fore-edge flap and edges/turn-ins in red leather, spine now covered with cloth and paper ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; traces of epigraphic stamp (large lozenge shape) reading "شفاء القلوب لقاء المحبوب" visible on lower cover where layers of paper have come away ; sewn in cream thread, two stations, often loose or missing ; worked endbands in cream thread, fair condition ; in quite poor condition with much abrasion, pest and water damage, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, etc. ; repairs in cloth, leather, and paper ; extremely ill-fitting.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; mainly with 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), lightly burnished with crown, star, crescent watermark (compare Heawood 1132) ; another thinner type, smooth and well-burnished, with three hats watermark ; still another thin and fairly translucent type with crown and grapes or crown and beaded diamond watermark.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.12, consisting of rectangular piece surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) set in a well of green and gold ; rectangular piece carries basmalah in a central cartouche defined by flanking accent pieces in gold, green and blue ; semi-circular piece (dome) carries crude floral vegetal design in green, white, blue, and red on a field of gold with outline in blue and vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and red above ; written area of incipit page surrounded by gold frame ; keywords and section headings rubricated ; some overlining and textual dividers in the form of discs in red.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) ; sans serif ; slight effect of words descending to baseline ; mainly closed counters ; occasional elongated horizontal strokes and swooping tails ; kāf alif ligature forming closed loop.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: I (2), 30 V(302), IV (310), I (312), III-1 (317) ; chiefly quinions ; final word of last line on verso of each leaf repeated as the first word of the first line on the following verso ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips ahead from p.9 to p.12, skips over two pages between pp.269-270).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," rectangular, reads: " قد رفع خيام الاختتام بعون الله الملك العلام عن نفائس عراب الكلام ... ليلة الجمعة السابعة والعشرين من رمضان المبارك من سنة خمسين وثمانمائة" ; "Scribal," triangular, reads: "قد تم تسويد الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب يوم الاثنين السابع عشر من ربيع الاول من سنة خمس وثلاثين ومائة والف من هجرة من له العز والشرف سنة ۱۱۳٥"', 'Explicit: "ولا ينافى ذلك صدور لا ادرى من المجتهد لما سبق"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي كرم بني آدم بالعقل القويم ... اما بعد فان اولى ما تقترحه القرائح القوارح ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the commentary by Muḥammad ibn Farāmurz on his Mirqāt al-wuṣūl ilá ʻilm al-uṣūl, on principles of jurisprudence.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 963', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 112', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "مصباح الحكماء | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Wove paper.', 'Decoration: Written mainly in a blue-black ink.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, modern hand in a medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 14-19 lines per page.', "Collation: Pages between sections left blank, some serving as 'title pages' (see pp.33, 65, 97, 129) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "ثم الفاعلة الباسطة القابضة والى هنا انتهى الكلام على عالم الطبيعة الصرفة ويلي هذا الجزء الكلام على البرز في الجامع"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله وحده والصلاة على سيدنا محمد واله وبعد فالانسان من بين سائر الاكوان ممتاز بالعقل والظن ومؤهل بذلك لسعادة ..."', "Title from 'title pages' for the various sections on pp.1, 36, 65, 97, 129.", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of an apparently anonymous philosophical work arranged here in five parts.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 374', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoraton, etc. would suggest early 19th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "419 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on interior of upper cover.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap), two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in pink wove paper (darker fibers visible within the sheet) ; upper and lower covers carry large stamped (with gold-painted recessed onlays in red-orange) mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. NSd) and pendants with tooled rosette and gold-painted accents, as well as guilloché roll border in gold ; design continues on flap ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with some abrasion, lifting of leather at fore edge flap (revealing interior / flesh side of teal leather lining fore edge flap), etc.', 'Support: European laid paper ; mainly with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-26 mm. apart (horizontal), watermark of "C & I HONIG" under crowned shield with horn (see p.2, 20, 28-29, 84, 248, etc.) and countermark "IV" (see p.6, etc.) ; another type with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 20 mm. apart (vertical) and watermark of winged-figure (cherub) holding aloft banner with "ALMASSO" and "GM" (see opening leaf, p.18 and final leaf) ; all sturdy, well-burnished, and tinted a pale blue.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of table of contents (fihris) on p.2, consisting of rectangular piece with cartouche carrying the title in red ("جلد اول مكى از ترجمۀ معارج النبوة في السير") flanked by faint gold floral motifs, surmounted by scalloped dome filled with central floral motif surrounded by swirling vegetal pattern all in same faint gold, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) ; another fine illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of text on p.20, consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral motifs in gold, surmounted by scalloped w-shaped piece filled with swirling vegetal composition with floral motifs all in gold with red accents, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and red, entire piece set in a well of pink and light blue bands ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by heavy gold frame with outermost red rule, elsewhere written area surrounded by narrower faint gold frame defined by black fillets with outermost red rule, divisions within table of contents defined by narrow faint gold bands outlined by black fillets ; textual dividers in the form of gold discs ; section headings, key words and passages, and notabilia rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, bold Turkish hand ; partially serifed with teardrop head-serifs on most ascenders apart from alif, slight effect of tilt to the left, many open counters, curvlinear descenders (some sweeping), pointing in distinct or conjoined dots, extensively vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 38 V(380), V+1 (391), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Dedication: As appears in preface on pp.23-24, composed for Sultan Süleyman I (r.1520-1566).', 'Explicit: "صكره مدينه كلدى بعض رواياتده زبير برينه طلحه بن عبد الله ديرلر تم الجلد المكى ويتلوه الجلد المدنى م"', 'Incipit: "الله ولى التوفيق الهادى الى سبيل الصواب واحسن الطريق الاف حمد وثناء بى قياس واصناف شكر وسپاس مرصوص الاساس جناب حقه جل وعلا كه مشيت شرف غايتى ... سبب تحرير كتاب وباعث تذكير خطاب در ..."', 'Title from headpiece at opening of table of contents on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant first volume (addressing Mecca, roughly the muqaddimah through rukn 3) of the translation by Muṣṭafá ibn Jalāl, i.e. Mustafa Çelebi Celâlzade, known as Koca Nişancî (d.1567), of the voluminous biographical work on the life of the Prophet by Muʻīn al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Amīn al-Farāhī al-Haravī, known as Mullā Miskīn or Muʻīn al-Miskīn (d.1501 or 2). Table of contents at opening (pp.2-15).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 483', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.393, transcription (of opening and closing sections) completed in 1116 [1704 or 5] by al-Ḥājj Ṣāliḥ ibn al-Ḥājj ʻUmar ibn al-Ḥājj Salmān ibn Muḥammad Afandī ( Hacı Salıh b. Hacı Ömer b. Hacı Selman b. Mehmet Efendi ). Paper, hand, etc. suggest transcription of middle section possibly late 17th or early 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 336" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards now covered in a teal textured/coated paper with red leather over spine (and traces of brown leather at exposed board edges) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings (doublures) and hinges in shell marbled paper (in light brown, teal, and pink) ; now sewn in white thread, four stations ; worked chevron endbands in blue and cream, good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of mainly two types ; opening type with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 26-28 mm. apart (vertical), three crescents watermark (82 mm. long, perpendicular to chains), quite well-burnished to glossy (burnisher\'s marks visible), crisp and translucent though sturdy ; second type (pp.133-330) with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 19-22 mm. apart (vertical), small two-handled pot watermark with letters "M P" [?] (see p.134, 136, 164, etc.), quite crisp, thin and translucent though sturdy, burnished, some bifolia tinted beige or pale orange ; occasionally other pot watermarked papers appear (see p.177, 216, 222, etc) ; some staining.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated.', "Script: Naskh ; two main hands ; opening and closing hand an elegant Turkish or 'Syrian' naskh, virtually serifless with dramatic effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing (for two and three dots) mainly in conjoined dots, some free assimilation of letters ; p.134 to p.330 supplied in a different hand (in a different layout on a different paper) with Persianate features, mainly serifless and fairly vertical, open and closed counters, pointing mainly in distinct dots, fully vocalized.", 'Layout: Written in 19 and 17 lines per page.', 'Collation: V+1 (11), 5 V(61), II+1 (66), 6 IV(114), IV+1 (123), V (133), 4 IV(165), 2 V(185), VI (197) ; chiefly quaternions and quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تمت كتابة هذا الكتاب من يد اضعف العباد الحاج احمد [؟] ابن الحاج عمر بن الحاج سلمان بن محمد افندى غفر الله لهم ولجميع المؤمنين والمؤمنات الاحياء منهم والاموات ولمن قال امين بحرمة سيد المرسلين في التاريخ ست عشر ومائة والف"', 'Explicit: "قال بل انتم اصحابي واخواننا الذين لم يأتوا بعد وانا فرطهم على الحوض"', 'Incipit: "قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم من اعتق رقبة مسلمة اعتق الله بكل عضو منه عضوا منه من النار حتى فرجه بفرجه غرابي ذر ..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf (p.1).', 'Ms. composite codex.', "Fine composite copy of Walī al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd Allāh al-Khaṭīb al-Tibrīzī's (d.1342) arrangement of Maṣābīḥ al-sunnah, the ḥadīth collection compiled from various sources and arranged by subject and degree of authority by al-Ḥusayn ibn Masʻūd al-Baghawī (d.1117?). Contents listing at opening (p.1)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 852', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.215, copied by Muḥammad Bakhsh valad-i Muḥammad ʻAẓīm with transcription completed 4 Ṣafar 1238 [ca. 21 October 1822].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Card with typed notes and additions in pen: "K239 | 17300 [in pencil] museum acc. nbr. | Indian [crossed out] Mogul (?) manuscript volume, paper cover, linen back. | Persian script | Amritsar." -- b. Photocopy of card with typed notes "17300 | 865 Amritsor, India | 1 Persian manuscript book | Original no. -- K239. Medical book. | Univ. of Mich., Div. of Fine Arts | Walter Koelz, 1932-33 | March 19, 1934." -- c. Scrap of ruled paper with notes in pencil "Persian | dated 1238 A.H. | c. 1900 | MIZAN AL-TIB = | medical book." -- d. Piece of paper with handwritten notes "3 Islamic mss. apparently brought over to RBR from Mus. of Anthro in late 1970\'s (Persian)" -- e. Length of white cotton cord with label attached "17300/K239v" [from handlist prepared by R. Dougherty, 1993].', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 1', "Binding: Pasteboards covered in linen and perhaps once-tinted paper with linen now over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; 'board linings' in untinted laid paper, lower hinge in recycled paper (manuscript 'waste') ; upper and lower covers carry line drawings in black ink of large central floral motifs ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; overall in extremely poor condition with signficant abrasion, lifting and losses of paper, textile and boards, staining, etc. ; housed in box for protection.", 'Support: non-European (likely Indian) laid paper with roughly 6 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct, some curving) and irregular chain lines visible, sturdy though transluscent, dark cream to beige in color, burnished ; much staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Keywords rubricated ; overlining in red ; diagram "دائره رجال الغيب" following colophon at close (p.215).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant Indian hand ; serifless with inclination to the right and slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and somewhat exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, mainly closed counters, yāʼ always pointed.', 'Layout: Written in 18 lines per page.', 'Collation: 13 IV(104), III (110) ; almost exclusively quaternions (followed by single ternion) ; middle of the quire marks in the form of red dots or small strokes in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf and lower outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (includes back flyleaf).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "نفع وار وبعون الله تعالی تم تمام شد کتاب میزان الطب ... خطه فقیر حقیر اضعف عباد الله محمد بخش ولد محمد عظیم حفظه الله عن ... بتاریخ چهارم ماه صفر موافق سنه ١٢٣٨ هجری"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمین والصلواة والسلام علی رسوله محمد واله الطیبین الطاهرین ... اما بعد العبد الضعیف النحیف طالب المعانی محمد ارزانی المسمی بمحمد اکبر میکوید [می گوید] که چون اطفال فقیر و دیگر اعزه در صدد خواندن علم طب بودند مختصری که صبیانرا [صبیان را] تعلم آن آسان بود بعبارتی موجز که مشتمل بر فوائد بسیار است تالیف نمودم و بمیزان الطب موسوم ساختم ..."', 'Title from opening matter (p.2) and colophon (p.215).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of the concise manual of medicine by Muḥammad Akbar Arzānī (d.1722).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 371', 'Origin: As appears at close on p.108, transcription completed Jumādá II [?] 1174 [January-February? 1761].', 'Former shelfmark: "425 [?] T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in light brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in marbled paper (in light and dark blue, light and dark pink, and dark green) ; upper and lower covers carry lozenge-shaped central ornament filled with gold-tooled vegetal composition, accompanied by tooled rosettes and gold-painted accents as well as guilloché roll border in gold ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn in light red thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in spring green and pale pink [?], tailband damaged ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, detaching at spine (revealing spine lining in leather with primaries sewn through),etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical or horizontal, fairly distinct) and no chain lines plainly visible, thin, crisp and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished, some leaves tinted (brown, yellow, beige, pale pink) and or gold-flecked ; a few bifolia of European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of scalloped w-shaped piece filled with swirling arabesques and floral motifs (in gold, red, blue, pink, white) around an empty gold cartouche, set in a well of gold bands flanking a band of red and a heavy band of interlace and surmounted by elaborate vertical stalks (tīgh) in red and blue ; incipit page silver-flecked ; written area throughout bordered in a heavy gold frame defined by black fillets and outermost red rule ; keywords and section headings rubricated ; illuminated tailpiece anchoring text at close on p.108 consisting of swirling floral vegetal composition in gold, pink and red with blue chī clouds and border.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Ottoman hand ; serifless, with slight effect of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, elongation of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 5 V(50), III (56), i ; almost exclusively quinions (with final ternion) ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between pp.75-76).', 'Colophon: "ح م سنه ١١٧٤ ج"', 'Explicit: "جخى كلام بونكله انجامه ايروب رساله تمام اولدى حق سبحانه و تعالى جمله مزه حسن خاتمه ميسر ايدوب طريق برهان رضاى رحماندن آيرميه بمنه وكرمه ولطفه"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعل العقل حجة في خلقه وايد الشرع به فيما يفرق بين الباطل وحقه ... وبعد اول آفرينشدن برو ميان ارباب وانشده عقل ايله نقل توامان ومعقول ومنقول فرسى رهان ايدكى ... اكه بناء نزاع اولنان مسئله لرده طريق برهانى بيان ايچون ... ورق تسويد اولنوب نامنه ميزان الحق فى اختيار الاحق دينلدى ..."', 'Title from opening matter on pp.2-3.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of Kâtip Çelebi's final work (composed in 1067/1656), addressing controversial questions of doctrine or practice with proposed solutions, and closing with an autobiographical account of his life and works (khātimah / hatime, beginning on p.91)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 972', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and eventually bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Accompanying materials: Four small slips (from two trimmed bifolia) "tipped in" carrying (paginated pp.5-8, 39-42).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 121', 'Binding: Boards covered in black textured cloth ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a geometric pattern (resembling a scale pattern) in dull gold ; cover gold-stamped with "الفلسفة العصرية" ; sewn in white thread, sewing failing, leaves loose ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Wove paper of two different types, one medium cream to beige in color, the other brown ; some offset of ink on facing pages.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a medium to bold line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 18-21 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, IX+1 (19), i ; some leaves left partially blank ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts / trimmed bifolia).', 'Incipit: "من تاريخ راند في عمر متأخري الحكماء الحسي التوحيدي او الاقتصادي او اللمسي او الالهي ان الاحساس هو الأثر الفعلي للقابل الحسي او قوة قبول الانطباعات بالموضوع الخارجي ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Copy of a selection of philosophical excerpts apparently intended as an aide-mémoire addressing Benjamin Rand's (1856-1934) Modern classical philosophers (see p.9), Henri Bergson's (1859–1941) Evolution créatrice (see p.31), al-Fārābī's ʻUyūn al-masāʼil (see p.34), etc., ending abruptly. Compare pp.129-143 in Isl. Ms. 933."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 534', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon though reading / study notice on 'title page' (p.5) may provide a terminus ante quem of 1633 (first part of Muḥarram 1043) ; paper, hand, etc. suggest late 16th or early 17th century.", 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.1-2) -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 179" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', "Binding: Pasteboards now covered in shell marbled paper (mainly in blue and brown) with tan leather over spine (quarter binding) and traces of brown leather at edges / turn-ins ; now Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted wove paper over manuscript 'waste' ; sewn in white or light blue thread, very tightly bound ; worked chevron endbands in turquoise and magenta, quite good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with much abrasion, lifting and losses of paper, delaminiation of boards, etc.", 'Support: European laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 29 mm. apart (vertical), anchor in circle watermark with star or leaf above (65 mm. tall, see p.12, etc.), and "Z M" under trefoil countermark (see p.94, 98, etc., compare Ancre inscrite dans un cercle no.83A, pp.5, 92 in Velkov, Les Filigranes dans les documents Ottomans, appearing in a ms. copied in Istanbul, 1588) ; quite well-burnished to glossy, fairly thick and sturdy, dark cream in color.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and abbreviation symbols rubricated.', "Script: Naskh ; elegant, compact 'Syrian' or Turkish hand ; virtually serifless with very slight effect of tilt to the left, mainly curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in distinct dots (though three dots represented by curved stroke), kāf mashqūqah preferred, some elongation of horizontal strokes and free assimilation of letters.", 'Layout: Written in 31 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 14 V(140) ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present except mid-quire ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Explicit: "ثم يدعوا بهذا الدعاء اللهم يا من بيده مفاتيح الغيوب ... وان يهون على ما اسالك في السلاوك اليك انك جواد كريم رؤوف رحيم فان قدح الله في باطنك القيام ... فاعلم ان اسباب السعادة قد برزت اعلامها ... وان يسر فهمه على كل من طلب قصد"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي رسم دقائق الحقائق في لطائف صحف الاسرار واطلع شمس المعرفة من غيب الغيب ضياء للبصائر ... اما بعد ايها الطالبون السالكون القاصدون المحققون لما سأل سائلكم كيف السلوك بحقائق الاسماء وترتيب درجاتها في معارج الارتقاء ... فاجبت سائلكم [؟] بلسانكم ونطق لسان بياني بحقيقة بناتكم علي ان معارف الحقائق قد دثرت [؟] رسومها وانظمت علومها وعدت فهومها لعدم الناصح ... وسميت هذا الكتاب موضحا للطريق وقسطاس التحقيق ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.5) and opening matter on p.6.", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the work on the most beautiful names of God (al-asmāʼ al-ḥusná) attributed to Aḥmad ibn ʻAlī al-Būnī (d.1255). Appears to end abruptly.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1030', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, etc. would suggest 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 179', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather ; Type II binding (with flap, now lost) ; lower doublure (board lining) in olive green-tinted and gold-flecked paper ; lower cover carries stamped and gold-painted mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition reminiscent of Déroche class. OSd 3 or 9) and pendants with gold-tooled and painted accents in small rosettes and strokes, as well as tooled guilloché roll border and gold-painted rules ; once sewn in light blue thread, two stations, now failed ; worked endbands in light blue and gold, only traces of tailband and primaries remain ; overall in extremely poor condition with spine leather and lining, upper cover and flap entirely lost, partial losses and severe staining / abrasion to lower cover (also fully detached), pest damage, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; mainly a type with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 27-29 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of scrollwork (see p.22, 388, 500, etc.) ; another type with 12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 21-25 mm. apart (vertical) and watermark of large double-headed eagle under crown and scroll with "B G" underneath and shield / escutcheon at center with six circles and band of smaller eagles (see p.112, 132, 172, etc.) ; another type with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 25-27 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of grapes / raisin (see p.346, etc.) and name "...MON" (see p.324, 348, etc.) ; another type with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 25-29 mm. apart (vertical), watermark of grapes (raisin) under crown (see p.378, etc.) and "P G" countermark (see p.394, etc.) ; burn and losses to leaves (with loss of text in final leaves, p.505 to close).', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) in at opening on p.4 consisting of rectangular panel with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral accents in gold, blue, and orange-red on grounds of blue and gold, surmounted by scalloped w-shaped piece filled with swirling floral vegetal decoration in gold with blue and orange red accents on a blue and gold ground, all set in a well consisting of bands of blue, gold interlace and orange red and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue with red accents ; section headings set off in simple illuminated rectangular pieces ; written area surrounded by a heavy gold frame defined by black fillets and outermost red rule ; keywords, section headings, notabilia, occasional vocalization and some abbreviation symbols rubricated ; occasional textual dividers in the form of hāʼ in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant, carefully executed Ottoman hand in a thin line ; mainly serifless (though very subtle head-serif occasionally appears) with effect of tilt to the left though adhering to baseline, marked elongation of horizontal strokes, curvilinear descenders (many sweeping), pointing mainly in distinct dots, many open counters, partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V-1 (9), 13 V(139), IV (147), 12 V(267) ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf).', 'Explicit: "قال الله تعالى واتوا النساء وصدقاتهن نحلة والانتحال ادعاء الشيء وتناوله ومنه يقال فلان ينتحل الشعر ونحل جسما"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين وصلواته على نبيه محمد واله اجمعين قال الشيخ ابو القاسم الحسين ابن محمد ابن المفضل الراغب ... كنت قد ذكرت في الرسالة المنبهة على فوائد القرآن ان الله تعالى كما جعل النبوة بنبينا مختتمة وجعل شرائعهم شريعة من وجه منتسخة ... فالفاظ القرآن هي لب كلام العرب وزبدته وواسطته وكرائمه ... وقد استخرت الله تعالى باملاء كتاب مستوفى فيه مفردات الفاظ القرآن على حروف التهجي ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from opening matter on p.6.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant though incomplete copy of the alphabetic lexicon of Qurʼānic vocabulary compiled by Abū al-Qāsim al-Ḥusayn ibn Muḥammad ibn al-Mufaḍḍal al-Rāghib al-Isfahānī (d.1108 or 9).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 671', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.72, copied by Muḥammad Kamāl al-Dīn Ibn al-Kayyāl (Mehmet Kemalettin İbnül Keyyâl) with transcription completed in latter Rajab 1017 [November 1608].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and label on lower cover, "IL 137" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in shell marbled paper (mainly in blue and red) with red leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted wove paper ; sewn in white thread, two stations ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, lifting and losses of paper,lower board partially split, detaching at spine, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly indistinct) and no chain lines visible, dense and sturdy, well-burnished ; some staining and tide lines, nibbled around edges.', 'Decoration: Headings and keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand ; partially but irregularly seriffed with small right-sloping head-serif on occasional lām or joined alif, effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, mainly bold sweeping shaqq on kāf but occasionally represented by vertical stroke with miniature kāf seated above it, pointing in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page.', 'Dedication: At the request of the grand vezir Ali Paşa (see heading at opening on p.2) "مفتئ زمان خواجه چلبى ابو السعود حضرتلرينك رساله مباركه سيدر كه مرحوم وزير اعظم على پاشا يسر الله له في الدارين ما يشا التماس ايدوب اكا ارسال ايتدوكيدر"', 'Collation: 3 V (30), V-4 (36) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تمت الرساله بحمد الله وعونه وحسن توفيقه في اواخر شهر رجب من شهور سنه سبعة عشر والف على يد الراجى عفو ربه محمد كمال الدين بن الكيال عفى عنه"', 'Explicit: "كمسه باباسنوك واناسنوك حقلرينى اوده مش كبى اولور وعهدلرندن قورتلمش اولور"', 'Incipit: "حمد وسباس وستايش بى قياس اول سامع الاصوات ومجيب الدعوات حضرتنه اولسون كم انك رحمت عميمه سى جميع عباده حاصل ونعمت جسيمه سى مطيع واهل عناده واصل در ..."', 'Title from heading at opening on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of brief treatise attributed to Abū al-Suʻūd al-ʻImādī (Hoca Çelebi, Mehmet Ebussuud [Ebusuud, Ebu's-suûd] Efendi, d.1574)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 134', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper likely suggests early 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Inserts with glosses (paginated pp.69-70 and pp.97-98).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 4. Mughni al-labib." ; "٥٨٧" on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings and interior of envelope flap in yellow paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal decoration, compare Déroche class. OAi 4) with pendants and cornerpieces, along with tooled border ; design continues on flap ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; overall in poor condition with abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, some pest damage, paper label affixed to upper cover, etc. ; repair to spine in red leather.', 'Support: non-European (Persian) laid paper of two types ; opening quinions in first type, crisp, thin and transluscent, sized and burnished to glossy with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, some curving) ; remaining quaternions in second type, sturdy, less transluscent, only lightly sized and burnished with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, some curving) ; no chain lines visible in either type.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs and inverted commas.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) ; virtually serifless ; mainly closed counters ; effect of words descending to baseline, occasionally more exaggerated ; elongation of horizontal strokes ; effect of tilt to the right ; around pp.110 hand changes, much more compact though similar to initial hand.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V-1 (9), 5 V(59), 12 IV (155) ; middle of the quire marks in the form of oblique strokes in black ink appear in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf and lower outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf and skips two pages between pp.29-30, pp.41-42, pp.45-46, pp.59-60, pp.73-74, pp.97-98, pp.105-106, pp.147-148, pp.217-218, pp.219-220, pp.245-246, pp.256-257, pp.263-264, pp.284-284 and four pages between pp.251-252).', 'Explicit: "يا حرف موضوع لنداء البعيد حقيقة او حكما وقد ينادى به القريب توكيدا وقيل هي مشتركة بين البعيد والقريب وقيل بينهما"', 'Incipit: "وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم اما بعد حمد الله على افضاله والصلوة والسلام على سيدنا محمد واله فان اولى ما تقترحه القرائح واعلى ما تجنح الى تحصيله الجوانح ما يتيسر به فهم كتاب الله المنزل ... ويتضح به معنى حديث نبيه المرسل ..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine though incomplete copy of Ibn Hishām's (d.761/1360) celebrated treatise on Arabic syntax, arranged by particle."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 616', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.434, copied by Ḥasan [?] ibn Ghulām ʻAlī [?] al-Najafī with transcription completed 25 Rajab 1110 [ca. 27 January 1699] in Mashhad.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, "IL 347" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather ; Type II binding (with flap, now with significant losses to fore edge flap) ; board linings in marbled paper (in blue-green, yellow and cream) ; upper and lower covers carry central blind-stamped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OSd) and epigraphic pendants with inscription "يا علي مدد" ; sewn mainly in red thread, two stations, though final gatherings sewn in yellow ; worked chevron endbands in green-blue, yellow, etc. now damaged with only a portion of headband remaining ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather and pasteboard, delamination of boards, losses to flap, negative draw in upper cover, etc. ; repair to fore edge flap in tan leather ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly distinct) and no chains distinctly visible, fairly crisp, thin and transluscent though sturdy, some inclusions, medium cream in color, well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, notabilia (side-heads) and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; occasional overlining in red ; textual divders in the form inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Persianate or Iraqi hand ; virtually serifless and quite rounded with curvilinear descenders, rightward descenders tapered, pointing in distinct dots though quite compact, very slight effect of tilt to the left, occasional sweeping tails and extension of horizontal strokes, freely ligatured, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: 27 IV (216), I (218) ; almost exclusively quaternions ; final leaf (following close of text) left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمت هذه الرسالة بعون الله تعالى وحسن تأييده في مشهد امامنا ومقتدانا علي بن موسى الرضا عليه الف الف التحية والثناء يوم الاثنين خامس وعشرون من شهر رجب المرجب بقلم اقل خلق الله واحوجهم الى رحمة ربه الغني حسن [؟] بن غلام [؟] علي النجفي حامدا مصليا مستغفرا ... سنة ١١١٠"', 'Explicit: "وقد علمت ما عانيت في التقويم والتثقيف لما وقع في الكتب من الحريف والتصحيف فاقلني عثرتي واستر عورتي وامن روعتي برحمتك يا رحيم وبفضلك يا كريم والحمد لله رب العالمين وصلى الله على محمد واله اجمعين الطيبين الطاهرين"', 'Incipit: "واحمده على ان خول جزيل الطول وسدد للاصابة في الفعل والقول وارشد الى مناهد الهدى وانقذ من مدارج الردى ... وقبل وبعد فهذا ما سبق به الوعد تهذيب مصنفي المترجم بالمغرب [المعرب] وتنميقه وترتيبه على حروف المعجم وتلفيقه اختصرته لاهل المعرفة ... وترجمته بكتاب المغرب في ترتيب المعرب ..."', 'Title from opening on (p.4).', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the lexicon of select words and phrases, particularly those which occur in the books of tradition and other works relating to law, arranged in alphabetical order. It is a version of the author's al-Muʻrib fī gharīb alfāẓ al-fuqahāʼ and is used extensively as a reference work by scholars of the Ḥanafī madhhab in particular."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1015', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.588, copied by ʻAbd al-Aʼimmah ibn al-Ḥājjī Khalaf al-Karbalāʼī with transcription completed 12 Shaʻbān 1080 [ca. 5 January 1670] perhaps in Karbalāʼ where the copyist resided.', 'Accompanying materials: Slip with notes, in pencil, "MAKDISI – III | Muḥāḍarāt al-udabāʼ" and in red ink in hand of Jameson "Leave this slip in book | 293 leaves (last blank | 30 cm. | Back cover detached"', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 164', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in tan leather ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped elongated mandorla (filled with floral vegetal composition) and pendants ; now sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked endbands in pink and cream, damaged ; overall in poor condition with much abrasion, staining, minor losses of board, lower cover detached etc. ; repairs to spine and fore edge flap in tan leather.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 7-8 curved but fairly distinct laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and occasional chain lines visible ; crisp, transluscent, occasional knots and inclusions, dark cream to beige in color, very well burnished to glossy ; staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Headings and keywords rubricated (except in the seventh quire from the end, pp.481-496) ; overlining and textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant, carefully executed Iraqi / Persianate hand in a medium line ; partially but somewhat irregularly seriffed (rightward serifs on many ascenders with the exception of free-standing alif, leftward serif on vertical stroke of kāf) and and fairly vertical (without inclination to the left or right) with some elongation of horizontal strokes, occasional sweeping descenders (final nūn, yāʼ, etc.), pointing (two and three dots) in strokes or conjoined dots, many closed counters ; headings in larger script approaching tawqīʻ (though not extensively ligatured).', 'Layout: Written in 26 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, IV-1 (7), 35 IV (287), IV-1 (294) ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; middle of the quire marks in the form of oblique strokes, upper outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; foliation in pencil, Western numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "اخر المجلدة الرابعة من كتاب محاضرات الادباء ومحاورات البلغاء وبها اتم الكتاب والحمد لله على اتمامه اولا واخرا وظاهرا وباطنا على يد اقل الخليقة بل اللاشيء في الحقيقة العبد الفقير عبد الائمة بن المرحوم الحاجي خلف الكربلائي مولدا وموطنا في اليوم الاحد الثاني عشر من شهر شعبان المعظم من شهور سنة ١٠٨٠ ثمانين والف من الهجرة المصطفوية على مهاجرها الف الف صلوة والف الف تحية واله الاطهار ما لاح الجديران في كل حين واوان تم وكمل وبالخير عم وشمل"', 'Explicit: "فان اخطأ ركب هو واصحابه وان اصاب حول وجهه فيصير هو السائل"', 'Incipit: "قال الشيخ ابو القاسم الحسين بن محمد بن المفضل الراغب رحمة الله عليه الحمد لله الذي تقصر الاقطار ان تحويه وتعجز الاستار ان تخفيه ... وبعد فان سيدنا عمر الله بمكانه ... احب ان اختار له مما صنفت من نكت الاخبار ومن عيون الاشعار وغيرهما من الكتب فصولا في محاضرات الادباء ومحاورات البلغاء يجعله صيقل الفهم ومادة العلم ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.4 and colophon on p.588.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the popular adab work by al-Rāghib al-Iṣfahānī addressing in 25 chapters such topics as intellect, food, love, death, animals, etc. and including poetry and short prose anecdotes. Four volumes in one.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 375', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, etc. would suggest early 19th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "412 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap), two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in dark green textured (embossed in scalloped patterns) and coated paper ; upper and lower covers carry large stamped (with gold-painted recessed onlays in red-orange) mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. NSd) and pendants with tooled rosette and gold-painted accents, as well as guilloché roll border in gold ; design continues on flap ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in cream and pink, good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion, fore edge flap detaching from lower cover, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper ; mainly with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-26 mm. apart (horizontal), watermark of "C & I HONIG" under crowned shield with horn (see p.6, 24, 30, 36, 40, 498, etc.) and countermark "IV" (see p.4, 8, etc.) ; another type with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 20 mm. apart (vertical) and watermark of winged-figure (cherub) holding aloft banner with "ALMASSO" (see p.2) ; all sturdy, well-burnished, and tinted a pale blue.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of table of contents (fihris) on p.4, consisting of rectangular piece with cartouche carrying the title in red ("جلد ثانى مكى از ترجمۀ معارج النبوة في السير") flanked by faint gold floral motifs, surmounted by scalloped dome filled with central floral motif surrounded by swirling vegetal pattern all in same faint gold, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) ; another fine illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of text on p.20, consisting of rectangular piece with empty (though traces of inscription in red ink) gold cartouche flanked by floral motifs in gold, surmounted by scalloped w-shaped piece filled with swirling vegetal composition with floral motifs all in gold with red accents, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and red, entire piece set in a well of light blue and pink bands ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by heavy gold frame with outermost red rule, elsewhere written area surrounded by narrower faint gold frame defined by black fillets with outermost red rule, divisions within table of contents defined by narrow faint gold bands outlined by black fillets ; section headings, key words and passages, and notabilia rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, bold Turkish hand ; partially serifed with teardrop head-serifs on most ascenders apart from alif, slight effect of tilt to the left, many open counters, curvlinear descenders (some sweeping), pointing in distinct or conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV+1 (9), V+1 (20), 37 V(390), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between pp.557-558).', 'Explicit: "الحمد لله على هذه العطية كتاب اخره ايرشدى خطاب اولدى الحمد لله على التوفيق واستغفر الله من كل تقصير وغفرانك ربنا واليك المصير نعم المولى ونعم النصير سبحان ربك رب العزة عما يصفون وسلام على المرسلين والحمد لله رب العالمين الفاتحه"', 'Incipit: "اول حضرتك صلى الله عليه وسلم مدينه منوره يه وصولى وتشريف قدوم ايچون انصارك استقبالدر ..."', 'Title from headpiece at opening of table of contents on p.4.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant second volume (addressing Medina, roughly rukn 4 and the tatimmah / khātimah) of the translation by Muṣṭafá ibn Jalāl, i.e. Mustafa Çelebi Celâlzade, known as Koca Nişancî (d.1567), of the voluminous biographical work on the life of the Prophet by Muʻīn al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Amīn al-Farāhī al-Haravī, known as Mullā Miskīn or Muʻīn al-Miskīn (d.1501 or 2). Table of contents at opening (pp.4-17).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 663', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.414, transcription of second work completed in the latter part of Dhū al-Qaʻdah 1087 [February 1677] by Muṣṭafá ibn Muḥammad. Opening work lacks colophon, but likely completed around the same time or slightly later (late 17th century to early 18th century).', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- c. Insert carrying notes (paginated pp.183-184).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, "IL 375" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in once marbled paper with dark red-brown leather over spine and edges/turn-ins (as well as now lost fore edge flap, likely, framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap, now lost) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; sewn in light cream thread, two stations ; traces of worked headband remain ; overall in somewhat poor condition with loss of flap, significant abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, etc. ; repair to spine in red leather.', 'Support: European laid paper of two main types ; opening work (through p.292) mainly on a type with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-27 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of scrollwork / arms with three bars (see p.20, 30, 31, etc. and compare Armoiries (16) - A. Indéterminées nos.1-8 dated 1673-1717 in Velkov, Les Filigranes dans les documents Ottomans), well-burnished to glossy, medium cream in color, fairly thin and crisp though sturdy ; final work (from p.293) mainly on a type with 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 29 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark (85 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.302, 303, etc.).', 'Decoration: Section headings, keywords and some abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke over keywords) rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) and naskh ; two elegant hands ; opening work in nastaʻlīq (talik), at least two hands, both compact and elongated in the vertical, virtually serifless with effect of words descending to baseline and of tilt to the left ; following work in a fine naskh, serifless with effect of tilt to the left, slight effect of words descending to baseline, curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes or conjoined dots, free assimilation of letters, slight contrast in thickness between horizontal and vertical strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 29 and 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 13 V(130), III+1 (137), IV (145), 5 V(195), V+1 (206) ; Chiefly quinions ; first work lacks catchwords but in second work last word of final line on the verso of each leaf is usually repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, distinct for each work ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب حرره الحقير الفقير المذنب المحتاج الى رحمة الله تعالى مصطفى بن محمد غفر الله له وجعل الجنة مثواه تحريرا في اواخر شهر ذي القعدة الشريفة لسنة سبع وثمانين والف م"', 'Explicit: [Muhimmāt al-muftī] "فانتقل فعل الابن اليه كما ... ولو استاجر نجارا ليسقط جواره على قارعة الطريق" ; [Badr al-wāʻiẓīn wa-dhukhr al-ʻābidīn] "فكيف لا تزال عند ذكر من هو شفيع المذنبين من امته ما دون من ربه للشعاعة وما هو الما فخر القيامة"', 'Incipit: [Muhimmāt al-muftī] "كتاب الطهارة الطهارة في اللغة النظافة وفي الشريعة النظافة عن النجاسات ..." ; [Badr al-wāʻiẓīn wa-dhukhr al-ʻābidīn] "المجلس الاول في الايمان قال الله تعالى الله ولي الذين امنوا يخرجهم من الظلمات الى النور والذين كفروا اولياؤهم الطاغوت يخرجهم من النور الى الظلمات اولئك اصحاب النار هم فيها خالدون ايها المؤمنون والعارفون فاختاروا بين الوليين ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. composite codex.', '2. p.294-p.414 : [Badr al-wāʻiẓīn wa-dhukhr al-ʻābidīn] / Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd al-Laṭīf Ibn Malak al-Rūmī.', "2. p.293 : ['title page' for second work, originally left blank, now carries assorted excerpts].", '1. p.2-p.292 : [Muhimmāt al-muftī] / Kemalpaşazade.', 'Fine copy of the collection of legal decisions by Kemalpaşazade (d.1534) followed by Badr al-wāʻiẓīn wa-dhukhr al-ʻābidīn, occasionally attributed to Firişteoğlu (Firiştezade) ʻAbd al-Laṭīf ibn ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz al-shahīr bi-Ibn Malak, but more likely by his son Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd al-Laṭīf Ibn Malak al-Rūmī. Contents listing on upper board lining.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 562 v.1', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.571, copied by Yūsuf ibn Khiḍr [Khaḍir] ibn Muḥammad al-Bāqānī al-Ḥanbalī. Given date of patronage statement and date of transcription given in second volume (Ṣafar 957 [February-March 1550], commissioned and copied by the same patron and copyist), transcription of this volume likely completed in 1550.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover "IL 264" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Boards covered in red cloth ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in brown wove paper ; now sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and yellow, quite good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with some staining, abrasion, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines (vertical) grouped in threes with 10-14 between chains and 28-34 between groups (see p.62, etc.) ; sturdy and dense, well-burnished to glossy ; minor pest damage.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols rubricated or in blue ink ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', "Script: Naskh ; elegant 'Syrian' (Palestinian) hand ; partially but irregularly seriffed with slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders (often sweeping), elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots, some free assimilation of letters.", 'Layout: Written in 29 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 28 V(280), i ; exclusively quinions ; foliation in black and red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "تم الجزء الاول من كتاب قاضي خان على روح مؤلفه الرحمة والرضوان ... على يد العبد الفقير الحقير المعترف بالعجز والتقصير راجي عفو ربه اللطيف الحنين المنان يوسف بن خضر [؟] بن محمد الباقاني نسبا والحنبلي مذهبا غفر الله له ولوالديه ولمن قرأ فيه او نظر فيه ودعا له ولوالديه ولجميع المسلمين بالمغفرة والرحمة ... والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Explicit: "ولو رأى امرأة تزني ثم تزوجها ان حبلت من المزني لا يطأها حتى تضع حملها وان لم تحبل يستحب له ان لا يطأها حتى تحيض والله اعلم بالصواب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة على رسوله محمد واله اجمعين حمدا يقربنا الى مرضات الله تعالى وكرامته وصلاة تبلغنا الى محبة الرسول وشفاعته ... قال القاضي الامام ... الحسن بن منصور بن محمود الاوزجندي ... ذكرت في هذا الكتاب من المسائل التي يغلب وقوعها ويمس الحاجة اليها ..."', 'Title from inscription on p.5.', 'Ms. codex.', "First of two volumes constituting a fine copy of Qāḍīkhān's (d.1196) treatise on fiqh, preceded by a table of contents (pp.4-7) ; this volume opening with the preface (followed by Kitāb al-Ṣalāh) and concluding with Bāb al-Istibrāʼ from Kitāb al-Buyūʻ."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 902', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.303, transcription executed by Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad Riz̤ā-yi Muz̲ahhib 9 Dhu al-Ḥijjah 1314 [ca. 11 May 1897] for the publishing house of Ḥājjī Aḥmad Aqā with correction supplied by Muḥammad Kāẓim.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Page from Otto Harrassowitz Bücher-Katalog Nr. 352, 1912, "Neupersische Literature," with description of this item marked, reads "1821 Wassâf. Taʼrikh. Täbris 1314. Lex. 8o. Ldrbd. 303 pg. Lithographie. Ethé 359. Mit ausführlichem Rand- und Interlinear-Kommentar." -- b. Card with notes in pencil, "Lithographed text, not MS. | (most lithographed texts are Indian/per Emile Savage-Smith)" -- c. Slip of paper "Persian Manuscripts [crossed out, then in pencil] lithographed text (Heyworth-Dunne?) No Husselman or Meredith- Owens notes" -- d. Slip of paper with inscription in black ink reading "Counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" (transcribed in handlist prepared by R. Dougherty, 1993).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 51', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in wove paper (lower board lining tinted lavender) ; sewn in dark brown thread, two stations, failing at opening of codex ; overall in fairly good condition with some negative draw in covers.', 'Support: Wove paper, light brown in color.', 'Layout: Mainly in 17 lines per page ; exemplar frame-ruled ; marginal glosses arranged in various geometrical shapes.', 'Collation: 19 IV (152) ; exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present (on both verso and recto of each leaf) ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals.', 'Colophon: "Scribal", triangular form, in Arabic, reads: "وقد تم المجلد الاول من تاريخ الوصاف المسمى بتجزية الامصار على يد اقل العباد عملا و اكثرهم زللا محمد بن محمد رضاي مذهب المرحوم التبريزي الاصل والمسكن في دار الطباعة للمخدوم المعظم فخر الحجاج [؟] والمعتمرين حاجي احمد اقا غفر الله لهما ولوالديهما بحق النبي والولي واولادهما المكرمين صلوات الله وسلامه عليهم اجمعين في يوم الاربعاء تاسع شهر ذي الحجة الحرام سنة 1314 وقد امعن النظر في تصحيحه بتوفيق الله ومنه العبد الاثم محمد كاظم عفي عنه"', 'Lithographed.', 'Title from colophon.', "Lithographed copy of the first volume of Vaṣṣāf's Tajziyat al-amṣār wa-tazjiyat al-aʻṣār, a history of the Īlkhāns intended as a continuation of ʻAlāʼ al-Dīn ʻAṭā Malik Juvaynī's (d.1283) Tārīkh-i Jahāngushā (Jahān-gushāy) and renowned for its form and style. Includes an abundance of marginal and interlinear glosses transferred from the exemplar."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1060', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at close (p.451), transcription of this the first volume completed 12 Rabīʻ II 484 [ca. 29 July 1444].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip of paper with note in Persian in pen identifying title, date of copying, and subject -- b. Index card with descriptive notes typed in German as well as transcription in clear black ink of note on other slip "اختيارات بديعى دائره المعارف طب"', 'Binding: Heavy boards covered in brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; likely two piece binding (trace of seam of overlapping flanges visible on spine) ; board linings in European laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped central mandorla and pendants filled with symmetrical floral / vegetal decoration, set off by rules dividing cover to quadrants and border in a row of s-shaped stamps defined by blind rules ; now sewn in white thread, two stations, no traces of endbands (perhaps lost in rebinding), rather tightly bound ; slightly larger than textblock and likely not original ; subtle repair to spine in red brown leather, new hinges in dark brown leather ; sound and overall in fairly good condition with some abrasion.', 'Support: non-European (possibly Persianate) laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly straight) and chain lines occasionally visible ; formation somewhat cloudy with many inclusions (plant matter, bits of fiber, etc.), thin though sturdy and quite well-burnished to glossy, beige to light brown in color ; flyleaves in European laid paper (potentially machine laid) with "GIOR MAGNANI" below scrollwork with bird above tower (compare Heawood 3748) ; numerous native page repairs in brown paper.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece at opening on p.2, rectangular in shape with title "كتاب اختيارات بديعي" in gold tawqīʻ in cartouche over swirling vegetal ground, flanked by delicate vegetal motifs in gold on azure blue ground, surrounded by now oxidized bands (with paper breakthrough) and surmounted by further decorative band in blue, gold and white with red accents, itself surmounted by fine tīgh ; keywords and headings rubricated, along with two-teeth stroke abbreviation.', 'Script: Naskh with some elements of nastaʻlīq ; elegant, spacious Turkic or Persianate hand in a medium line ; virtually serifless with elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, long but fairly straight shaqq on kāf, quite rounded with curvilinear descenders and terminating strokes of tāʼ, bāʼ, etc., pointing mainly in distinct dots but occasionally with stroke for two dots, point of final and free-standing nūn set down within tall, angled bowl (rightward stroke typically higher than leftward stroke which occasionally curves and nearly forms a complete circle around dot), rāʼ often set within preceding dāl (particularly in instances of در), some free assimilation of letters, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page (single column) ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, 2 IV(16), 2+IV (26), 9 IV(98), IV+1 (107), IV (115), III+1 (122), 13 IV(226), i ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; occasional foliation in pencil, Hindu-Arabic numerals, often toward the middle of the page in the outer margin ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمت المجلد الاول عن کتاب الموسوم باختیارات فی یوم 12 الجمعه عن [؟] ربیع الثانی سنه 848 هجریه م"', 'Incipit: "امداد حمد بی عدد و اعداد سپاس بی قیاس مبدعی را که آثار ابداع او بر هر ورقی از اوراق و شجری از اشجار سمت ..."', 'Title from colophon on p.451.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant early copy of the first volume of Ikhtiyārāt-i badīʻī, a work of materia medica (pharmacopoeia) by ʻAlī ibn al-Ḥusayn al-Anṣārī known as Ḥājjī Zayn al-ʻAṭṭār (d.1403 or 4).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1006', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.466, copied by Aḥmad al-Ḥalabī al-Ḥanafī with transcription completed in Cairo, 17 Muḥarram 796 [ca. 22 November 1393].', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 155', 'Binding: Pasteboards now covered with light purple cloth ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted wove paper ; traces of stamped mandorla in upper and lower covers below cloth ; sewn mainly in brown thread, four stations, many threads broken, resewn in a few gatherings toward the close ; once worked endbands, headband gone, core of tailband fully exposed and hanging on by a thread, overall in fair condition with some staining and abrasion ; ill-fitting and likely not original to codex.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with roughly 5 laid lines per cm. (vertical, 20 in 38 mm., fairly distinct) and chain lines faint but just barely visible (horizontal) with 4-5 mm. between chains and 45 mm. between groups, lightly burnished and not especially smooth, some inclusions (compare Arabe 205 and Arabe 302 in Humbert, "Papiers non filigranés utilisés au Proche-Orient jusqu’en 1450: essai de typologie," p.32) ; flyleaves in a different non-European (possibly Indian) laid paper ; some pest damage.', 'Decoration: Section headings and keywords rubricated ; others overlined with two-teeth stroke abbreviation symbol (also in red).', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, compact Syrian / Egyptian hand in a medium to bold line ; serifless with mainly open counters, pointing in distinct dots, elongation of horizontal strokes, some sweeping descenders, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iii, 4 V(40), I+1 (43), I (45), II (49), 18 V(229), I (231), ii ; chiefly quinions ; quire numbering in the form of whole words with catch title in the upper outer corner of the recto of the opening leaf of nearly every quire ; pp.87-92 and 97-104 on later replacement leaves, different hand and paper ; and catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves with opening table of contents, etc.).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تم الكتاب ولله الحمد على احسانه وتفضله وتوفيقه على يد العبد الضعيف احمد الحلبي الحنفي ختم الله له وللمسلمين بالخير في سابع عشر شهر الله المحرم سنة ست وتسعين وسبعمائة جعل الله تعالى عاقبتها الى خير وذلك بالقاهرة المحروسة جعلها الله تعالى دار اسلام الى يوم القيامة اللهم اغفر لمن نظر فيه ودعا لكاتبه ومؤلفه بالرحمة والمغفرة ولجميع المسلمين امين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل"', 'Explicit: "ولو جعلت كانها لم تكن لكانت من ستة وبقي سهم للعصبة والله تعالى اعلم"', 'Incipit: "رب يسر وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله باب طلب الشفعة قال رحمه الله فان علم الشفيع بالشفع بالبيع اشهد في مجلسه [على الطلب] ثم على البائع لو في يده اي اذا كان المبيع في يده او على المشتري او عند العقار ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine early copy of the fifth volume of the commentary by ʻUthmān ibn ʻAlī al-Zaylaʻī (d.1342) on Abū al-Barakāt ʻAbd Allāh ibn Aḥmad al-Nasafī's (d.1310) important treatise of Ḥanafī fiqh, Kanz al-daqāʼiq, a synopsis of his own Kitāb al-Wāfī, modelled on the Hidāyah of ʻAlī ibn Abī Bakr al-Marghīnānī (d. 1196 or 7). Table of contents added at opening (see pp.2-3)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 562 v.2', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on pp.575-576, copied by Yūsuf ibn Khiḍr [Khaḍir] ibn Muḥammad al-Bāqānī al-Ḥanbalī with transcription completed in Ṣafar 957 [February-March 1550].', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover "IL 264" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboards now covered in red cloth (evidence of tooled and stamped leather beneath) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in brown wove paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped mandorla under the cloth ; sewn in dark cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and yellow, good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with some staining, abrasion, lifting of cloth at board corners, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines (vertical) grouped in threes with 13-16 mm. between chains and 30-35 mm. between groups (see p.34, etc.) ; sturdy and dense, well-burnished to glossy ; later flyleaves in European laid paper with anchor in circle watermark (visible in back flyleaf).', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', "Script: Naskh ; elegant 'Syrian' (Palestinian) hand ; partially but irregularly seriffed with slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders (some sweeping), pointing in distinct dots, some free assimilation of letters, etc.", 'Layout: Written in 29 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 28 V(280), III (286), iii ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present (occasionally cut off) ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تم الجز الثاني من كتاب قاضي خان على مؤلفه الرحمة والرضوان على يد العبد الفقير الحقير المعترف بالعجز والتقصير راجي رحمة ربه اللطيف الحنين المنان يوسف بن الحاج خضر [؟] بن الحاج محمد الباقاني نسبا والحنبلي مذهبا غفر الله له ولوالديه ولمن قرأ او نظر فيه ودعا له بالمغفرة ولجميع المسلمين ... وذلك في صفر الخير سنة ٩۵۷"', 'Explicit: "قال ابو القاسم رحمه الله لا يجوز وفقه واذ اذن له القاضي فهما افتيا بصحة الحجر على الحر البالغ كما هو مذهب ابي يوسف ومحمد رحمهما الله والله اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب"', 'Incipit: "كتاب الاجازات فصل في الالفاظ التي تنعقد بها الاجازة وفي تعليق انعقادها بالشرط ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Second of two volumes constituting a fine copy of Qāḍīkhān's (d.1196) treatise on fiqh, preceded by a table of contents (pp.5-7) ; this volume opening in Kitāb al-Ijāzāt and concluding in Kitāb al-Ḥajr."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1021', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.146, opening work copied by Muḥammad ...[?] Munshī ( محمد ... منشي [?] ) with transcription completed 20 Ramaḍān 1203 [?] [ca. 14 June 1789 ?]. As appears in colophon on p.217, transcription of second work completed 1 Muḥarram 1203 [?] [ca. 2 October 1788]. Use of same or very similar paper in each work suggests such nearly contemporary dates of transcription.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Used call slip with notes in handwriting of Jameson on reverse "\'Coal-cellar\' MS | Sulaiman purchase | 10-20-70" (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Slip with notes in handwriting of Eilts [?] and Jameson "1253 AH 1837 or 8 =colophon | Persian | title – ? | author – ? | Brought to RBR on 10-27-70 by Mr. Eilts. | Purchased by Mr. Sulaiman from Librarie Tunisienne in 1967. Letter & invoice in MSS file. [actually, this manuscript does not appear in the inventory listing in the administrative files and was not purchased from Librarie Tunisienne but from Haziq-n-Mohi Rare Book Sellers of Hyderabad ; likely mistakenly assigned to "Sulaiman Purchase" manuscripts]| See inscription in book" (paginated pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 170', "Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped (with yellow-tinted paper onlays) mandorla, pendants, cornerpieces and borders defined by 'gold'-painted fillets ; epigraphic stamps used for cornerpieces ; sewn in heavy white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and now dull cream, fairly good condition, primaries stitched through spine lining ; overall in poor condition with much abrasion and staining, lifting and losses of onlays, cover detaching at upper hinge and spine lining (except where primaries stitched), minor delamination of boards, etc.", 'Support: non-European (likely Indian) laid paper of at least two types ; mainly a type (appearing in opening work and bulk of second work) with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat indistinct, some curving) and chain lines only faintly visible (see p.148), cloudy formation, many fibers and inclusions visible, thin and transluscent though sturdy, lightly burnished, dark cream in color ; final type (appearing at close of second work) with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct, some curving) and no chain lines visible, slightly thicker and sturdier than main type.', 'Decoration: Keywords and headings rubricated ; overlining in red ; textual dividers in the form of three inverted commas.', 'Script: Shikastah-nastaʻlīq ( شكسته نستعليق ) ; two bold Indian hands ; opening work supplied in fluid though somewhat angular hand in a medium line, freely ligatured and casually pointed with gentle effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, etc. ; second work supplied in a graceful hand in a medium line, freely ligatured with effect of words descending to baseline, quite rounded with smooth curvilinear descenders (some dramatically sweeping), pointing (though somewhat casual) mainly in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 and 16 lines per page.', 'Collation: 13 IV(104), II (108) ; exclusively quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of oblique strokes in black in the upper-outer corner of the right-hand leaf and lower-outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: [Mukātabāt] "كتبه محمد ... منشي ... تحرير بستم شهر رمضان المبارك سنه ١٢٠٠٣ [؟] هجرى"; [Ruqʻāt-i ʻInāyat Allāh Kanbūh] "... ... رقم الحروف ... تاريخ غره ماه محرم سنه ١٢٠٣ [؟] هجرى"', 'Incipit: [Mukātabāt] " بر راز شناسان سخن نهفته نماند مکاتباتی که از زبان خدیو پاک روان سیفخان به بعضی خوانین..." ; [Ruqʻāt-i ʻInāyat Allāh Kanbūh] "این مکتوبات چند از شیخ عنایت الله کنبوه که منشی عهد بود نوشته شد جزو اغارید است ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '5. p.219-p.220 : [assorted excerpts including "recipe containing sesame, ginger and sugar, etc. to help gain weight and have a bright complexion," a charm, etc. from description of Connie Bobroff].', '4. p.218 : [blank].', '3. p.149-p.217 : Ruqʻāt-i ʻInāyat Allāh Kanbūh / ʻInāyat Allāh Kanbūh.', '2. p.147-p.148 : [blank].', '1. p.6-p.146 : [Mukātabāt] / Navāb Sayf Khān.', 'Composite manuscript carrying two works comprising collections of correspondence, the first of Faqīr Allāh Navvāb [Navāb] Sayf Khān (d.1683) with his pupil the prince Dārā Shikūh (Dārā Shukūh, d.1659) son of Shāh Jahān (r.1628-57), and the second of ʻInāyat Allāh Kanbūh (d.1671). Contributions to the cataloguing from Connie Bobroff (including identification and transcription) and Abdullah Ghouchani. See another ms. copy of the first work in Maulana Azad Library, Aligarh Muslim University, no. 1335.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 125', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests 16th century.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 23. Mukhtar al-sihah."', 'Binding: Pasteboard covered in green-brown leather with dark brown leather repairs on spine and at edges/turn-ins ; Type II binding (with flap, now mostly lost) ; board linings in laid paper ; cover bears blind-stamped scalloped mandorla with floral vegetal composition (compare Déroche class. NA 4) and gold-painted accents, along with frame in tooled fillets; sewn in yellow thread, two stations, though many quires loose ; endbands entirely gone ; in extremely poor condition with envelope flap and portion of fore-edge flap lost, upper cover detaching, significant abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather (especially at spine), delamination of boards, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 6-7 laid lines per cm., curved and sagging ; chain lines only sporadically visible ; quite smooth with very few inclusions but whole fibers seen in sheet ; minor pest damage and staining.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviations rubricated ; occasional textual divders in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; virtually serifless ; mainly closed counters ; characteristic effect of words descending to baseline, occasionally even more exaggerated ; occasional extension of horizontal strokes ; mainly closed counters ; letterforms characteristic of nastaʻlīq ; extensively vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 9 V(90), I (92), 2 (94) ; a leaf or more may be missing near close (between pp.186-187, compare catchwords) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "اللام اللبد بوزن الجلد واحد اللبد واللبدة اخص منه قلت وجمعهما البد ومنه قوله بضم الكاف وقد يدخلون عليه تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب تم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله بجميع المحامد على جميع النعم والصلوة والسلام على خير خلقه محمد المبعوث إلى خير الأمم وعلى آله وصحبه مفاتيح الحكم ومصابيح الظلم قال العبد الفقير إلى رحمة ربه ومعرفته محمد بن أبي بكر بن عبد القادر الرازي رحمة الله تعالي عليه هذا مختصر في علم اللغة جمعته من كتاب الصحاح ... وسميته مختار الصحاح ..."', 'Title from opening (p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', "Incomplete copy of al-Rāzī's abridged recension of al-Jawharī's Arabic lexicon, Tāj al-lughah wa-ṣiḥāḥ al-ʻArabīyah, commonly known as al-Ṣiḥāḥ. Ends just following Baāb al-Kāf with an excerpt from Bāb al-Lām."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 542', 'Origin: As appears in colophon (fol.122a), copying finished ("wa-qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min hādhihi al-nuskhah al-sharīfah") by "Ṣafī al-Dīn Ibrāhīm ibn Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad al-Fiqhī al-Murīdī al-maʻrūf bi-Fiqhī Muḥammad al-Gharīb" on the 10th of Shawwāl 771 / 7th May 1370.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From red-bordered paper label on upper cover "٤٢" ; from spine label "IL 324" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboard covered with European paper (seen also in board linings and back flyleaf, bearing Anchor watermark) and leather (cover edges and spine) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; does not cover textblock well ; upper cover measures smaller than lower cover ; board linings in European laid paper with anchor watermark ; upper cover bears paper label with former shelfmark "٤٢" and spine bears paper label with former shelfmark "IL 324" ; in poor condition ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (Arab) laid paper ; many undissolved fibers evident ; chain lines visible, running vertically and found in alternating groups of twos and threes, spaced roughly 8 mm. between the individual chain lines and 52 mm. between groups ; compare that of BnF Arabe 5915 copied in Cairo as reported in Humbert, G. "Papiers non filigranés utilisés au Proche-Orient jusqu\'en 1450: essai de typologie."', 'Decoration: Marginal illustration in green and sepia on fol.113a in the section on blood money (Kitāb al-diyāt) depicts "زقاق غير نافذ وزقاق نافذ" ; rectangular figure on fol.39a is accompanied by caption "نصف ثلث سدس" ; textual abbreviations in red "ف" "ه" "م ف" "سم ف".', 'Script: Naskh ; clear hand in a medium line ; sans serif with low sweeping tails on final ʻayn, ḥāʼ, etc. ; chapter and section headings in a larger, seriffed, display script.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page.', 'Collation: iii, 12 V (120), III (126), i ; chiefly quinions; catchwords present, directly under final line on left hand side of page; pagination added later in pencil, Western numerals.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads, "والحمد لله وحده والصلاة على من لا نبي بعده وقد وقع الفراغ من هذه النسخة الشريفة على يد العبد الضعيف اضعف الطلاب [...?] بذنوبه [?] صفي الدين بن [?] ابراهيم بن محمد بن احمد الفقهي المريدي المعروف بفقهي [?] محمد الغريب غفر الله له ولوالديه ولجميع المسلمين عاشر شوال من شهور سنة احدى وسبعين وسبعمائة"', 'Explicit: "كان لم يكن ثم اقسم الباقي على سهام الباقين تم والحمدلله على التمام وللرسول افضل السلام"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله على [...?] نعمايه احمده على جليل الايه واشكره على جميل بلايه واشهده ان لا اله الا هو ... وبعد فطلب الي من وجب جوابه على ان اجمع له مختصرا على مذهب الامام الاعظم ابي حنيفة عفي الله عنه وارضاه ... هذا المختصر كما طلبه ... وسميته المختار للفتوى"', 'Title from opening.', 'Ms. codex.', "Early copy of Abū al-Faḍl ʻAbd Allāh ibn Maḥmūd ibn Mawdūd al-Mawṣilī al-Buldajī's (d. 683/1284) compendium of Ḥanafī legal decisions. Includes extensive commentary in same hand as the main text, as well as many notes, quotes, case descriptions, and other extra-textual material in varying hands. Ms. is badly wormed though vast majority of the text is preserved. See Isl. Ms. 78 and Isl. Ms. 543 for other ms. copies of this work."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 543', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.287, copied by Mūsá ibn Ḥājjī with transcription completed 15 [?] Rabīʻ I 803 [ca. 3 November 1400].', 'Accompanying materials: Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover "IL 325" and spine label (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in laid paper with dark red-brown leather over spine, foreedge flap, and edges/turn-ins (framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-tooled central ornament (effect of diamond with pendants) built up of four-pointed stars ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in slate blue and light yellow, fairly good condition (tail especially) ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather (especially at spine), delamination of boards, pest damage, cover detaching at spine (spine lining is well affixed to cover but detaching from textblock), etc. ; ill-fitting and likely not made to measure to this textblock (perhaps to fit a range of sizes, note overlapping leather flanges on spine) ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (lkely Arab) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines grouped in threes with 8-10 mm. between chains and 47-50 between groups (horizontal), see pp.52-53 ; well-burnished, fairly smooth, thick and sturdy though fairly crisp, dark cream in color ; staining, tide lines, tears, and some pest damage.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and abbreviation symbols rubricated ;', "Script: Naskh ; fine Turkish or 'Syrian' hand in a medium line ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, some elongation and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, many open counters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, kāf mashqūqah preferred though occasionally represented by partial ascender with seated hamzah (especially in rubricated headings see p.217, etc.) ; colophon in a script approaching tawqīʻ, highly ligatured.", 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV-2 (6), 16 IV(134), IV-1 (141) ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present though nearly cut off ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly skips ahead ten pages following p.268 with p.279).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "تم بعون الله وحسن توفيقه وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين وقع الفراغ من كتابة الكتاب الشريف في ليلة الخمسة العشرة في شهر الله المبارك ربيع الاول سنة ثلث وثمانمائة على يد العبد الضعيف المحتاج الى رحمة ربه [؟] اللطيف موسى بن حاجى غفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه ولجميع المسلمين والمسلمات اجمعين آمين يا رب العالمين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله الطيبين الطاهرين"', 'Explicit: "كان لم يكن ثم اقسم الباقي على سهام الباقين"', 'Incipit: "الفقهاء واشهر وشاع بينهم ذكره وانتشر طلب مني بعض اولاد بني اخي النجباء ان ارمزه رموزا يعدف بها مذاهب بقية الفقهاء ... كتاب الطهارة فمن اراد الصلوة وهو محدث فليتوضأ"', 'Title from inscription on interior of upper cover.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine (though acephalous) copy of Abū al-Faḍl ʻAbd Allāh ibn Maḥmūd ibn Mawdūd al-Mawṣilī al-Buldajī’s (d.1284) compendium of Ḥanafī legal decisions. See Isl. Ms. 542 and Isl. Ms. 78 for other ms. copies of this work.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Three crescents. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Contains tables explaining inheritance portions.', 'Text not rubricated; name of author and his teacher underlined in red on p. [1]; marginal corrections and notes in hand of copyist.', '"Faṣl fī ʻilm al-munāsakhāt bi-l-jadwal, in some copies stated to be taken from Ibn al-Hāʾim\'s Sharḥ al-kifāya." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 70 and plate XCIIa.', '"A treatise on vested inheritance." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Three circles with cross.', 'Contains a numerical table.', 'Text not rubricated; marginal corrections in hand of copyist; notes in French on small slips of paper bound into volume.', 'A miscellany of Koranic verses, prayers, and spells, probably numerological and magical spells.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 78', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.224, copied by ʻAlī ibn Khalīl ibn Amīn ibn Zakarīyā ibn ʻĪsá ibn Farrā Sulaymān [?] in the year 804 [1401 or 1402].', 'Accompanying materials: Two inserted slips, both included in pagination, one folded piece containing calligraphy practice in black ink (p.10), the other a folded blank insert (pp.87-88) ; between pp.82-83, (not paginated) a slip with text in black ink, piece of marginalia from top left of p.175.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 114. Al-Mukhtar li \'l-fatwa."', 'Binding: Pasteboards originally covered in brown leather, seen on fore-edge, spine, and turn-ins with paper impressed on the tooled leather (see upper and lower covers as well as envelope flap) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; original leather blind-tooled, with florets and horizontal bars ; repairs/secondary binding in leather seen on spine and turn-ins ; sewn in cream thread, four sewing stations ; endbands in mustard and light green ; in poor condition with red rot and abrasion on all corners, head of fore-edge flap missing, and pasteboards delaminating ; vertical crack down front board, old repair with strip of laid paper.', 'Support: European and non-European (Arab) laid paper ; early quires in European paper with bow and arrow watermark (see p.62, 64, etc. corresponding with Inventory J 340, Piccard watermark collection No. 123436), laid lines spaced roughly 7 laid lines per cm. and chain lines (vertical) roughly 38 mm. apart ; others in European paper having tower with three merlons watermark (see p.71, 74, etc. very similar to Inventory J 340, Piccard watermark collection, No. 100313 but earlier production thereof), laid lines spaced roughly 8-9 laid lines per cm. and chain lines (vertical) difficult to see but spaced roughly 35-40 mm. apart ; non-European (Arab) laid paper for the mid to latter quires, with some arrangement of groups of threes and twos or groups of three (see p.158), roughly 11 mm. between the chains and roughly 43 mm. between the groups ; some pages breaking along chain lines (stabilized by previous conservator with laid paper, cream colored, water-soluble adhesive ; current conservation with Japanese paper and sodium CMC) ; iron gall ink of main text with minor flaking and some ink burn on some pages.', 'Decoration: A few textual dividers in the form of inverted commas ; one page (p.48) ruled with red rule-border ; diagram in margin of p.84 ; text rubricated with chapter headings, section breaks "فصل", sigla, textual dividers, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Syrian or Egyptian (?) hand ; mainly sans serif but right-sloping head serifs appearing occasionally on lām, free-standing alif, etc. ; kāf mashkūlah preferred ; mostly closed counters ; interesting lām alif ligature where letters form a kind of loop ; text of p.69-70 supplied later in a different hand, also a naskh seemingly imitating the main hand ; glosses in at least three hands.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, II(4), I(6), 3 IV(30), V(40), 7 IV(96), II(100), III(106), I+1(109), i; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (flyleaves and inserts included in pagination).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," mainly triangular, reads: "تمت بعون الله تعالى و حسن توقيفه و صلى الله على سيدنا محمد و اله اجمعين و صحبه الطاهرين اجمعين و الله اعلم بالصواب كتبه على [كذا] عبد الضعيف المذنب المحتاج الى رحمة الله تعالى علي بن خليل بن امين بن زكريا بن عيسى بن فدا سلمان [؟] غفر الله له و لواديه و لجميع المسلمين و المسلمات امين يا رب العالمين تم تاريخ سنة اربع ثمانمائة"', 'Explicit: "ولا يدخل مولى الموالاة ولا مولى المولى الا عند عدمهم وان كان له موال اعتقوه وموال واعتقهم فهي باطلة"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله على جزيل نعمائه احمده على جليل الاية [كذا] و اشكره على جميل بلائه و اشهد ان لا اله الا هو شهادة اعدها ليوم لقائه [كلمات مشطوبة: "اشهد ان لا اله الا"] ان محمدا عبده و رسوله سيد رسله … وبعد فطلب مني الي من وجب جوابه على ان اجمع له مختصرا على مذهب الامام ابى حنيفة … و سيمته الدختار للفتوى … كتاب الطهارة من اراد الصلوة و هو محدث فليتوضا"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Early copy of Abū al-Faḍl ʻAbd Allāh ibn Maḥmūd ibn Mawdūd al-Mawṣilī al-Buldajī’s (d. 683/1284) compendium of Ḥanafī legal decisions. See Isl. Ms. 542 and Isl. Ms. 543 for other ms. copies of this work. Description provided mainly by Sarah Mirza.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 101', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.251, copied by Yūsuf ibn Walī ibn Dāwūd (Yusuf Velî Davut) with transcription finished in the year 1086 [1675 or 6].', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 137. Work on law."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (blue, salmon, etc.) with dark brown leather over spine, foreedge flap and edges/turn-ins ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in laid European paper ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and cream, fair condition ; overall in poor condition with severe abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather (especially lower cover), staining, moisture damage, pest damage, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper mainly with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 26-28 mm. apart ; watermarks include three crescents (tre lune) and crown-star-crescent ; thick and burnished.', 'Decoration: Section headings, keywords, and abbreviation symbols often rubricated, some with green or red accents (geometric fill, crosshatch, etc.) , occasionally entirely in green.', 'Script: Naskh ; bold Turkish hand ; virtually serifless ; slight effect of tilt to the left ; pointing mainly in distinct dots ; fairly compact though with some elongation of horizontal strokes and occasional sweeping descenders ; even more compact from around p.159 ; especially heavy line for horizontal strokes ; some sections appear to have been provided in a different hand.', 'Layout: Written in 11 and 13 lines per page (initially 11 then shifts to 13 lines per page at p.159) ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 12 V(120), IV (128) ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords irregularly present and appear occasionally cut off ; in rare instances lacks proper catchwords though last word of final line on the verso of each leaf is usually repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips opening leaf and two pages between pp.249-250).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular and rectangular, reads: "تمت الكتاب بعون الله ملك الوهاب [كذا] ... كتبه الفقير ... مذنب محتاج الى غنى رحمة واسعة يوسف بن ولي بن داود غفر الله لهم ولجميع المؤمنين والمؤمنات والاحياء منهم والاموات"', 'Explicit: "ولا مولى المولى الا عند عدمهم وان كان له موال اعتق [كذا] واعتقهم فهي بطلة [باطلة]"', 'Incipit: "كتاب الطهارة من اراد الصلوة وهو محدث فليتوضأ و [كذا] وفرض الوضوء غسل الوجه واليدين مع المرفقين ومسح ربع الرأس وغسل الرجلين مع الكعبين ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Clear copy of Abū al-Faḍl ʻAbd Allāh ibn Maḥmūd ibn Mawdūd al-Mawṣilī al-Buldajī’s (d.1284) compendium of Ḥanafī legal decisions. This copy lacks the introductory matter but opens directly with Kitāb al-Ṭahārah. See Mich. Isl. Ms. 78, 102, 542 and 543 for other ms. copies of this work.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 102', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.221, copied by Muṣṭafá ibn ʻAlī ibn [?] Abū [sic] al-Qāsim (Mustafa Ali Ebulkasem) with transcription finished in the year 1089 [1678 or 9].', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 69. Treatise on law."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in once marbled paper (blue, salmon, etc.) with dark brown leather over spine, foreedge flap and edges/turn-ins ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in laid European paper ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and cream, fair condition ; overall in poor condition with severe abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, staining, moisture damage, pest damage, some delamination of boards, some spine slant (slightly cocked), etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of two types ; mainly with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), three crescents (tre lune) watermark, thick and burnished ; a second type appears in the opening and final quires with 12-13 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 24-40 mm. apart (horizontal), coat of arms watermark with lions flanking cross in shield above two circles, thin but sturdy and well-burnished ; some staining.', 'Decoration: Occasional use of red ink to accent section headings.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Turkish hand ; virtually serifless, though occasional head serif appears on alif of lām alif ligature, forms a loop to resemble numeral ٩ ; slight effect of tilt to the left ; many open counters ; pointing mainly in distinct dots ; some elongation of horizontal strokes and occasional sweeping descenders ; alif following initial kāf often curves up to form closed loop with shaqq of kāf ; in latter quires, a more vertical, compact hand, showing influence of nastaʻlīq with occasional head serifs, rectilinear descenders, slight effect of words descending to baseline.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 11 V(110), I (112) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم تم تم تم الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب يد عبد الضعيف مصطفى بن علي بن [؟] ابو القاسم غفر الله لهم اجمعين سنة تسع وثمانين والف سنة ۱۰۸۹"', 'Explicit: "ولا يدخل مولى الموالات ولا مولى المولى الا عند عدمهم وان كان له موالي اعتقوه واعتقهم فهي باطلة"', 'Incipit: "كتاب الطهارة من اراد الصلوة وهو محدث فليتوضأ وفرض الوضوء غسل الوجه واليدين مع المرفقين ومسح ربع الرأس وغسل الرجلين مع الكعبين ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Clear copy of Abū al-Faḍl ʻAbd Allāh ibn Maḥmūd ibn Mawdūd al-Mawṣilī al-Buldajī’s (d.1284) compendium of Ḥanafī legal decisions. This copy lacks the introductory matter but opens directly with Kitāb al-Ṭahārah. See Mich. Isl. Ms. 78, 101, 542 and 543 for other ms. copies of this work.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 898', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest late 19th century ; bookseller's label suggests terminus ante quem in the range of 1886 to 1916.", 'Accompanying materials: "a. Card with writing in hand of Emilie Savage-Smith: \'Not native hand, European? or very old writer | Arabic, in pencil | probably transcribing a text.\' -- b. Slip of paper: \'Persian [crossed out] Arabic Manuscripts (Heyworth-Dunne?) No Husselman or Meredith-Owens notes\' -- c. Slip of paper: \'Counted for 1968/69 Annual Report.\'"- from handlist prepared by R. Dougherty, 1993, no longer in volume.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 47', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark brown cloth ; Western style binding ; pastedowns in wove paper (opening leaf of opening quire and final leaf of final quire) ; sewn in heavy cream thread, four stations, over two wide tapes / bands (flexible sewing) ; overall in fair condition with spine cloth gone (exposing sewing), some staining, abrasion, etc.', 'Support: European wove paper upon which leaves carrying the transcript have been affixed (compare Isl. Ms. 896).', 'Script: Naskh ; somewhat crudely executed in pencil in imitation of the exemplar ; mainly serifless, rounded with curvilinear descenders, occasional slight effect of words inclining to the left, otherwise adhering fairly consistently to the baseline, pointing in distinct dots, mainly open counters ; section headings in a larger, bolded script approaching tawqīʻ or thuluth ; compare Isl. Ms. 896.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV* (7), 2 IV(23), IV* (30) ; opening leaf of opening quire and final leaf of final quire serving as pastedowns ; exclusively quaternions ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, in lower outer corner of each page.', 'Incipit: "تملك قسطنطين الاخير في التفاقم طول اناتك ايها السيد الضابط الكل كيف سمحت بهذه الامور بطول اناتك لكن اقول مع النبي من ذا عرف عقل الرب او من صار مشيرا عليه اي قلب حجري يقدر ان لا يكبر ولا ينوب ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Transcript of excerpts from a historical work addressing the final Byzantine Emperor Constantine XI Palaiologos [Palaeologus] (d.1453), and the Ottoman Sultans Bayezid II (r.1481-1512), Selim I (r.1512-1520), and Süleyman I [the Magnificent] (r.1520-1566).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 916', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 65', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "بقاء النفس ابن سمنا [كذا]| J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine, but appears to be over three recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper of at least two different types.', 'Decoration: Section headings and keywords rubricated or in purple ink (multiple shades of red also used).', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; two or three compact hands ; opening hand (also supplying a few other sections) quite neat and carefully executed in a bold line, serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, strong horizontal character adhering consistently to the baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots ; section headings in naskh or tawqīʻ ; from p.19 to p.178, a quick hand in a medium line with slight effect of inclination to the right ; from p.179 to close, hand similar to the opening hand but in a much thinner line.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 25 lines per page.', 'Collation: In section carrying Kitāb al-Samāʻ wa al-ʻālam, pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (appearing on every other page) and one quire numbered (see p.219) ; in section carrying draft treatise on modern philosophy, (p.237 to close) verso of each leaf left blank and foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly repeats p.291 two additional times).', 'Explicit: "ذلك الصفيع الذي كان هو القدح المعلي في خلال وغضون النصف الاخير من القرن التاسع عشر تم الكتاب"', 'Incipit: "قد استوفينا الكلام في الفن الاول على الامور العامة في الطبيعيات ثم تلوناه بالفن الثاني في الأجرام السماوية والعالم والصور والحركات الأولى في عالم الطبيعية وحققنا أحوال الأجسام التي تفسد والتي لا تفسد ثم تلوناه بالكلام على الكون والفساد وأسطقساته ثم تلوناه بالكلام على أفعال الكيفيات الأولى وانفعالاتها والأمزجة المتولدة عنها وبقى علينا ان نتكلم على امور الكائنة ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from rubricated heading at opening on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', '12. 3. p.237-p.477 : Madkhal al-falsafah al-ḥadīthah.', '11. 2. p.235-p.236 : [blank].', '10. p.233-234 : [excerpt from al-Kawn wa-al-fasād] / Ibn Sīnā.', '9. p.232 : [blank].', '8. p.231 : [title page for al-Nabāt].', '7. p.179-p.230 : al-Fann al-thānī min Ṭabīʻīyāt al-Shifāʼ fī al-Samāʻ wa al-ʻālam / Ibn Sīnā.', '6.19-p.178 : [excerpt from what appears to be a work on ʻilm al-kalām, opening in the second chapter and continuing with al-Iʻrāḍ, al-Jawāhir, al-Ilāhīyāt, and al-Samʻīyāt and concluding with a preface for the excerpt, followed by the introduction and first chapter, al-Umūr al-ʻāmmah].', '5. p.17-p.18 : [excerpt from Kitāb al-Nafs] / Ibn Sīnā.', '4. p.16 : [blank].', '3. p.15 : [excerpt from] al-Fann al-thāmin fī al-Ḥayawān min jumlat al-Ṭabīʻīyāt / Ibn Sīnā.', '2. p.3-p.14 : [excerpt from al-Nabāt] / Ibn Sīnā.', '1. p.2 : [excerpt from Kitāb al-Nafs] / Ibn Sīnā.', "Careful copy of assorted excerpts from al-Ṭabīʻīyāt, the section on natural sciences from Ibn Sīnā's Kitāb al-Shifāʼ, opening with excerpts from Kitāb al-Nafs (fann 6), al-Nabāt (fann 7), al-Ḥayawān (fann 8), al-Samāʻ wa al-ʻālam (fann 2), and al-Kawn wa-al-fasād (fann 3) and bound together with what appears to be a work on ʻilm al-kalām, as well as a working draft of an anonymous treatise on modern philosophy, addressing Hegel, etc., the opening page of which appears to have been mistakenly bound into Isl. Ms. 913 (see p.3 of that volume)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 99', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.144a (p.287), copied by Muḥammad ibn Fallāḥ ibn ʻAlī ibn Fallāḥ. Transcription finished ("faragha min taḥrīrih...") 5 Ṣafar 917 [ca. 4 May 1511].', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 140, Al-Nafi."', 'Binding: Pasteboards (recycled paper) originally covered with reddish brown goat skin, spine and fore-edge flap repaired with lighter brown leather, now darker with age ; Type II binding (with flap) ; upper and lower covers carry gorgeous blind-tooled almond-shaped ornament (mandorla) with band and geometric infilling set off by rosette stamps (compare Weisweiler 89-95) as well as tooled rule borders and rosette accents ; sewn in two sewing stations, dark green thread, broken at head and tail ; endbands in maroon and white, partially intact at head and tail ; in poor condition ; leather has shrunk significantly with text-block protruding ; bottom of spine partially detatched ; top endband missing, bottom partially gone ; severe abrasion on all corners ; pasteboards delaminating ; spine partially detached from back cover ; fore-edge flap is stitched to back cover at hinge (sewn mend).', "Support: European laid paper with roughly 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines (horizontal) spaced roughly 30 mm. apart ; only lightly burnished ; thick and creamy ; watermark of scales / balance in circle with six-pointed star above (see p.6, 8, 274, 276, etc.) ; bull's head with eyes and above it a rod consisting of one line with a flower above that (compare Piccard inventory J340, no. 64743, Lechtenberg, 1492) ; loose folia at end, partially detatched pages at beginning ; water damage throughout but does not impact legibility.", 'Decoration: Text rubricated with chapter and section headings, overlining, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; two Persian or Turkish hands ; first hand virtually sans serif (though occasional right-sloping head-serifs on lām, alif, etc., perhaps inadvertantly) with generally open counters, dots rather than strokes for pointing, slight effect of tilt to the left ; p.185 on supplied in second hand, sans serif, effect of tilt to the right, free assimilation of letters such as rāʼ and final hāʼ, heavier line ; partially vocalized ; several hands for marginal and interlinear glosses.', 'Layout: Written in 18 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: III+1 (7), 12 IV (103), 2 III+1 (117), 3 IV (141), II (145) ; chiefly quaternions ; top three lines of fol.107a (p.213) left blank ; final leaf originally left blank ; lacks catchwords ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "تم الكتاب بعون الله تع و حسن توفيقه ... فرغ من تحريره افقر عباد الله تع و احوجهم الى رحمته و رضوانه محمد بن فلاح بن علي بن فلاح يوم الخامس من شهر صفر ختم بالخير و الظفر من شهورسنة سبع عشرة و تسعماية هجرية ... و الحمد لله وحده صلى الله على محمد و اله الطاهرين"', 'Explicit: "الثالثة لا تعقل العقلة بهيمة ولا اتلاف مال ويختص ضمانها بالجناية على الادمي حسب فهذا اخر ما اردنا ذكره وقصدنا حصره مختصرين مطوله [فراغ] ونسأل الله سبحانه ان يجعلنا ممن شكر عمله وغفر زلله وجعل الجنة منقله ومنتقله انه يجيب من سأله ولا يخسر من امله وصلى على سيدنا محمد النبي واله وسلم تسليما كثيرا"', 'Incipit: "الحمد الله الذي صغرت في عظمته عبادة العابدين و حصرت عن شكر نعمته السنة الحامدين و قصرت عن وصف كماله افكلر العالمين ... و صلى الله على اكرم المرسلين و سيد الاولين والاخرين محمد خاتم النبيين ... اما بعد فاني مورد لك هذا المختصر خلاصة المذهب المعتبر بالفاظ محبرة وعبارة [عبارات] محررة تظفرك بنخبه وتوصلك الى شعبه ..."', "Title from 'title page' fol.1a (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the author's abridgment of his Sharāʼiʻ al-Islām, the authoritative manual of Shīʻah law. Description provided mainly by Sarah Mirza."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 147', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, hand, etc. suggests early 15th century, ca. 1410-1417 ; dated statement on 'title page' provides a rough terminus ante quem of 1431.", 'Accompanying materials: A few slips carrying notes, glosses, etc. (paginated pp.115-116, pp.183-184, and pp.205-206).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 99. Al-Mukhtasar of Taftazani." ; "٤١٣" on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; upper and lower covers bear border in tooled fillets and faint central motif resembling an inverted lamp ; sewn in heavy cream thread, two stations ; worked endbands in cream and dark brown or black, intact and in fair condition ; overall in poor condition with abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, delamination of boards, some negative draw in both upper and lower cover, some spine slant (slightly cocked), etc. ; repairs in tan leather.', "Support: Mainly European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 32 mm. apart (horizontal), and gothic 'R' (in two lines) watermark (see p.94, 176, 202, 210, 250, 260, 268 274, 300, etc. and compare Briquet 8968 dated 1410, Piccard nos. 29028, 29029, and 29031 dated 1410, Piccard no.29027 dated 1416, and Briquet 8969 dated 1417) ; also, toward close and here and there throughout codex, non-European (likely Arab), non-watermarked laid paper with grouped chain lines, perhaps in a couple of types, mainly with chain lines grouped in threes with 8-9 mm. between the chains (horizontal) and 46 mm. between the groups, 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical, see p.286, 318, etc.) but also with chain lines grouped in threes with 9-12 mm. between the chains (horizontal), 40-42 mm. between groups, and 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical, see p.220).", 'Decoration: Some section headings rubricated ; overlining in red ; occasional textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh ; bold hand with influence of nastaʻlīq ; virtually serifless, though occasional head serif appears on alif of lām alif ligature ; slight effect of tilt to the right ; mainly closed counters ; some elongation of horizontal strokes ; freely ligatured with final tāʼ marbūtah assimilated with preceding rāʼ and lām alif ligatured occasionally forming a closed loop ; alif maqṣūrah often mardūdah ; kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV (8), IV+1 (17), 3 IV(41), III (47), 13 IV(151), IV-1+1 (161) ; chiefly quaternions ; final leaf replaced ; proper catchwords mainly present but occasionally lacking (though last word of final line on the verso of the leaf is repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto) ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf and inserts).', 'Explicit: "مشتملة على لفظ الفاتحة ومنطوية على حسن الخاتمة ختم الله لنا بالحسنى ويسر لنا الفوز بالذخر الاسنى بحق النبي صلى الله عليه وعلى اله واصحابه اجمعين تمت الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب"', 'Incipit: "نحمدك يا من شرح صدورنا لتلخيص البيان في ايضاح المعاني ... وبعد فيقول الفقير الى الله الغني مسعود بن عمر المدعو بسعد التفتازاني ... قد شرحت فيما مضى تلخيص المفتاح"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Shorter commentary by al-Taftāzānī on Talkhīṣ al-Miftāḥ by Jalāl al-Dīn al-Qazwīnī (d. 739/1338), an abridgment of the third part of Miftāḥ al-ʻulūm by al-Sakkākī (d. 626/1229), on ʻIlm al-maʻānī wa-al-bayān.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Three crescents. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'In Maghribī script.', 'Text rubricated; marginal corrections in hand of copyist (same as that of Mich. Isl. Ms. 812,2).', 'Pp. [1-29]. Bound with: Treatise on geometry, pp. [30-44].', 'Compendium on geometry; division of angles.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 521', 'Origin: As appears in colophons on pp.61-62 and pp.116, both texts likely copied by Ibrāhīm ibn ʻAbd Allāh with transcription of opening work completed 15 Shawwāl 1141 [ca. 14 May 1729] and transcription of second work completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1140 [ca. 28 July 1728].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. (pp.1-2)-- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and label on lower cover, "IL 14" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (in pink/salmon, blue, yellow, etc.) with teal leather over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in purple wove paper ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and purple, quite good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; one type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark with grapes (raisin) under cartouche with "D T" [?] and crown (see p.10, 19, etc.), crisp though sturdy, burnished (some bifolia only lightly others to glossy) ; another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 20-21 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark with grapes (raisin) under cartouche with "D A" and crown (see p.30, 43, etc.) ; still another type with 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark (94 mm. long, perpendicular to chains).', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; compact Turkish hand ; virtually serifless, with tilt to the left, quite rounded with curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, some superscripting of final letters of words, freely ligatured ; partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 15 and 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 2 V(20), IV (28), VI (40), VIII (56), i ; opening work lacks proper catchwords but last word of final line on the verso of each leaf is usually repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; catchwords present in second work ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and front flyleaf).', 'Colophon: [al-Mukhtaṣar fī bayān al-iʻtiqād] "Scribal," triangular, reads "قد وقع الفراغ من تحرير هذه النسخة الشريفة اللطيفة المرغوبة بين طالبين المسمى باسير ملاحده في شهر نصف شوال في يوم آذنه يوقت ضحوة الاصغر تم يد الضعيف ابراهيم بن عبد الله غفر الله له ولجميع المسلمين والمسلمات ... والحمد لله رب العالمين برحمتك يا ارحم الراحمين سنه مائة والف احدى واربعين في ١٥ ش سنه ١١۴۱ م" ; [Sharḥ al-Fiqh al-akbar] "Scribal," triangular, reads "اللهم صل وسلم على جميع الانبياء والمرسلين خصوصا على محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين سنه اربعين مائه والف تم في يوم اذينه من شهر ذي الحجه المبارك في وقت العصر غفر الله ذنوبه وذنوب المؤمنين والمؤمنات برحمتك يا ارحم الراحمين والحمد لله رب العالمين في ۲۰ ذى الحجه سنه ١١۴۰ م"', 'Explicit: [al-Mukhtaṣar fī bayān al-iʻtiqād] "وروي عن انيس بن مالك ان نقش خاتم رسول الله كان ثلاثة اسطر الاول محمد والثاني رسول والثالث الله وكان خاتم ابو بكر نعم القادر هو الله ونقش خاتم علي بن ابي طالب الملك لله" ; [Sharḥ al-Fiqh al-akbar] "اي يوفق ويثبت على اعتقاد صحيح وعمل صالح من تعلق مشيئته الازلية في الازل بهدايته قول الامام الاعظم ابي ح رحمة الله عليه والله تع يهدى من يشاء الى آه كانه قال فما علينا الا البلاغ والله يهدى من يشاء الى صراط مستقيم اللهم يا هادي المهتدين اهدنا الصراط المستقيم تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب م"', 'Incipit: [al-Mukhtaṣar fī bayān al-iʻtiqād] "الحمد لله المتوحد بازلى الوجود والذات المتفرد بقدم النعوت والصفات ... اما بعد فيقول العبد المفتقر الى رحمة الله تع يحيى بن ابي بكر الحنفي ... لما اتفق من تأليف مختصر بالفارسي في بيان الاعتقاد وانتشر ذلك بين طالبيه بالاجتهاد سأل مني جماعة من الطلبة والخلان ان اكتب مسائله عربيا فصيح البيان يسهل حفظ للمبتدين من الاخوان فاجبتهم الى ذلك ... وكان المختصر على ثلاثة اباب ..." ; [Sharḥ al-Fiqh al-akbar] "الحمد لله الذي هدينا [هدانا] الى طريق اهل السنة والجماعة بفضله العظيم ... اما بعد فيقول العبد الضعيف المذنب ابو المنتهى ... ان كتاب الاكبر الذي صنفه الامام الاعظم كتاب صحيح مقبول ... وقد ضف ابو حنيفة رحمه الله في ذلك الفقه الاكبر ... فاردت ان اجمع كلمات من الكتاب والسنة من الكتب المعتبرة حتى يكون شرحا لهذا الكتاب الشريف اللطيف ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.117-p.118 : [originally blank, now excerpts, etc.]', '3. p.64-p.116 : [Sharḥ al-Fiqh al-akbar] / Abū al-Muntahá Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad al-Maghnīsāwī.', "2. p.63 : [originally blank as 'title page' for second work, now excerpts].", '1. p.8-p.62 : [al-Mukhtaṣar fī bayān al-iʻtiqād, or Asīr-i malāḥidah] / Yaḥyā ibn Abī Bakr al-Ḥanafī.', "Two theological works, namely Yaḥyá ibn Abī Bakr al-Ḥanafī's al-Mukhtaṣar fī bayān al-iʻtqād or Asīr-i malāḥidah, an Arabic rendering of the author's own work on doctrine originally composed in Persian, followed by Abū al-Muntahá Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad al-Maghnīsāwī's (d.1592) commentary on the theological treatise of Abū Ḥanīfah (d.767), al-Fiqh al-akbar."])

en: (count: ['Contains geometrical diagrams of lute strings and a drawing of a lute showing the sound characteristics of its body and fretboard.', 'Text and tables rubricated; foliation in alphabetical numbers in hand of copyist; kurrāsahs numbered 1-3.', 'Date in colophon: wa-yudhkar fī al-nuskhah al-aṣlīyah innahā thānī nuskhah nuqilat min nuskhah bi-khaṭṭ ʻAbd Allāh al-Sahrawardī muʼarrikhuhu bi-tārīkh awwal Jumād al-awwal sanat 727 [i.e. 25 March 1327] wa-taḥarrarat hādhihi al-nuskhah al-mubārakah fī yawm sittat Rabīʻ al-awwal sanat 1333 [i.e. 22 January 1915].', 'Treatise on rhythm, playing the lute, singing, and the mathematical characteristics of music; in 11 faṣls.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Andrea Galvani of Pordenone. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 36 and no.860.', 'Text rubricated; marginal notes and corrections in hand of copyist.', "Date and copyist's name in colophon: wa-kāna al-farāgh min kitābat hādhihi al-nuskhah yawm al-sabt muwāfiq arbaʻah ayyām khalat min Dhī al-Ḥijjah alladhī huwa min shuhūr sanat 1300 [6 October 1883] muwāfiq 26 Tūt sanat 1600 qibṭīyah ʻalá yad kātibihi Aḥmad Saʻd Luqbā[?] al-Marṣafī baladan al-Shāfiʻī madhhaban.", 'Commentary by unidentified author on Tuḥfat al-ikhwān, a poem on timekeeping by Aḥmad ibn Qāsim.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 51', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.154 (p.308), copied by ʻAlī ibn Muṣṭafá, imām at what appears to be the mosque of Fatih Sultan Mehmet (Mehmed II) in Istanbul (where al-Ḥalabī had himself been imām years earlier). Transcription finished in the first part of Rajab 1113 [December 1701]. Collated with and transcribed from the copy of al-Shaykh Sulṭān ʻAlī al-Qāriʼ.', "Accompanying materials: Bifolium (including the 'title page' and incipit page) from a ms. copy of Imāmʹzādah's Shirʻat al-Islām slipped inside the lower cover (paginated pp.315-318).", 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 94. Ghunyat al-mutamalli." ; likely former shelfmark in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, on head edge of textblock, quite illegible.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather, envelope flap in deep maroon leather and repairs in various other leathers ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in pink surface-tinted and gold or silver flecked (?) paper ; interior of fore edge flap in red leather ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped and red and gold-painted scalloped central mandorla filled with floral vegetal composition, along with roll border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in dark blue or black thread, two stations ; endbands virtually gone, only traces of primaries and core remain for each ; in poor condition with much staining, abrasion, lifting of leathers, minor pest damage, some spine slant (cocked), upper cover detaching, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 14 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 20-23 mm. apart (horizontal) ; watermark of grapes with band and crown above ; fol.132-fol.141 (pp.264-282) supplied on different European paper, very highly burnished to glossy with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (horizontal).', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) on fol.2b (p.4), badly stained and obscured, consisting of rectangular piece surmounted by w-shaped piece ; rectangular piece (in gold with blue border) now empty ; w-shaped piece carries floral vegetal design in white, lavender, pink, orange, and green on a field of gold, surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue with red accents, and surrounded by well in red with white cross and dot pattern ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of gold band with black fillets ; keywords, section headings, and notabilia (side-heads) rubricated ; overlining in red of text being commented upon ; textual divders in the form of red discs, three dots, etc.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand ; occasional left sloping head-serifs on alif ; slight effect of tilt to the left ; many open counters ; bar of kāf (shaqq) elongated in somewhat exaggerated fashion ; many descenders majmūʻah ; fol.132-fol.141 (pp.264-282) supplied in different hand, also an elegant Ottoman naskh, quite rounded and freely ligatured.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, III (6), I+1 (9), IV (17), V+1 (28), 9 V(118), III+2 (126), VI (138), I+1 (141), 2 II (149), III (155), ii ; chiefly quinions ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, begins with ٥ on page facing incipit page and ends with ۱٥٧ ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes some flyleaves and insert).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "هذه النسخة قوبلت ثم كتبت من نسخة الشيخ سلطان علي القارئ عليه رحمة الباري الحمد لله الذي بنعمته تتم الصالحات وتنزل البركات وقد وقع الفراغ من تحرير هذا الكتاب يوم الاربعاء في اول رجب من سنة ثلث عشرة ومائة والف على يد عبد الفقير المحتاج الى غفران ربه القدير علي بن مصطفى الامام في جامع ابو الفتح سلطان محمد خان في قلقه بوغازكن [؟] غفر الله له ولوالديه ولكل المسلمين والمسلمات والمؤمنين والمؤمنات اجمعين"', 'Explicit: "لان يلقي الله تعالى ومهرها في ذمتها خير له من ان يطأ امرأة لا تصلي قال الله تعالى وامر اهلك بالصلوة واصطبر عليها لا نسألك رزقا نحن نرزقك والعقابة للتقوى ونسأل الله تعالى حسن العقابة ... وله الحمد اولا واخرا وباطنا وظاهرا وسرا وعلانية على كل حال وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم دائما متصلا الى يوم الحشر والمآب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعل العبادة مفتح السعادة ومطمح السيادة وملمح الحسنى والزيادة ... وبعد فيقول العبد المفتقر الى رحمة ربه الغني ابراهيم بن محمد بن ابراهيم الحلبي قد كنت شرحت كتاب منية المصلي شرحا وسميته بغنية المتملي لكن رأيت فيه بعض الاطالة التي ربما اوجبت للمبتدئين والقاصرين الملالة فاحببت ان اختصر من فرائد دلائله وازيد في فوائد مسائله تسهيلا للطالبين وتنويلا للراغبين ..."', 'Title suppled by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of al-Ḥalabī's abridgement of his own commentary on the Munyat al-muṣallī by Sadīd al-Dīn Kashgharī, addressing matters of ablution and ritual prayer. Opens with biographical sketch and table of contents on fol.1a-1b (p.1-2)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 514', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper and hand suggest 14th or 15th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (paginated pp.1-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From spine label and inscription on interior of upper cover, "IL 326" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in combed marbled paper (salmon, orange, blue, etc.) with brown leather over spine and edges/turn-ins ; Type II binding (once with flap, though now lost) ; board linings in laid European paper ; sewn in olive thread, two stations ; in poor condition with upper cover completely detached at spine, spine leather and lower cover completely detached from textblock, flap lost, some abrasion, delamination of boards, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (Arab) laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines grouped in threes with chains spaced roughly 12 mm. apart and 42 mm. between groups.', 'Decoration: Keywords introducing sections are set apart via elongation of horizontal strokes ; occasional overlining and accents (for section headings) in brick-red ink ; textual dividers (paragraph marks) in the form of circle or isolated hāʼ with dot at center.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Syrian hand ; serifless, inconsistently pointed (though in distinct dots), and with a very slight tilt to the left ; occasional vocalization.', 'Layout: Written in 22-26 lines per page.', 'Collation: V-2 (8), 8 V(88), V-1 (97), 5 V(147), V-1 (156) ; chiefly quinions ; at least two leaves are mossing from the opening quire, possibly more ; quire numbering in the form of full words, most often lost to trimming ; catchwords present at the end of each quire ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Explicit: "قيل كان ابو الدردا رضي الله عنه يقعد الى القبور فقيل له في ذلك فقال اجلس الى قوم تذكروني معادي وان قمت لم يغتابوني ميمون بن مهران خرجت مع عمر بن عبد العزيز الى المقبرة فلما نظر"', 'Incipit: " قراه او سمعه او نظر فيه وان يجعله خالصا لوجهه وان يختم لنا بخير ويوفقنا لما يرضيه من القول والعمل والنية وان يسامحنا في تقصيرنا وتفريطنا ولا يكلنا الى انفسنا طرفة عين ولا الى اجد من خلفه فانه حسبنا ونعم الوكيل"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Clear though incomplete copy of Ibn Qudāmah al-Maqdisī's abridgment of Ibn al-Jawzī's Minhāj al-qāṣidīn, itself based on al-Ghazzālī's Iḥyāʼ ʻulūm al-dīn ; acephalous and ending abruptly with end wanting. Description provided by Maxim Romanov."])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Crown; crown with 6-pointed star and crescent.', 'Contains short tables.', 'Text and marginal notes rubricated; text bordered in red; marginal notes and corrections in hand of copyist and others.', "Date and author's name in colophon: sanat 999 tamma kitāb Mukhtaṣar silk al-durrayn fī ḥall al-nayyirayn li-al-shaykh al-imām al-ʻallāmah Yaḥyá ibn Muḥammad al-Ḥaṭṭāb.", 'Pp. [45-46] contain a short text with diagram entitled: Kitāb fī maʻrifat ḥall al-shams wa-al-qamar.', '"An abridgement of the treatise by Ibn ʻAbd al-Ghaffār" called Silk al-durrayn, which is a commentary on Ibn al-Majdī\'s al-Durr al-yatīm, "auxiliary tables for compiling annual ephemerides for the sun and moon." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), pp. 72, 85, and 88.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 975', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 124', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "تلخيص شروح هياكل النور | السهروردى | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Wove paper.', 'Script: Naskh with influence of ruqʻah ; compact modern hand in a thin to medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with effect of inclination to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 33-41 lines per page.', 'Collation: Pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "اي من الحواس الباطنة القوة الفكرية المرتبة في البطن الاوسط من الدماغ وهي التي بها التركيب والتفصيل والاستنباط"', 'Incipit: "يا من نصب رايات آيات قدرته على كواهل هياكل الممكنات واودع اسرار حكمته فى قوابل شواكل الكائنات ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy of a concise selection of commentaries on Shihāb al-Dīn Yaḥyá ibn Ḥabash al-Suhrawardī’s (d.1191) Hayākil al-nūr, opening with excerpts from Jalāl al-Dīn al-Dawānī's (d.1502 or 3) Shawākil al-ḥūr."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 437', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at close of on fol.4a, Munājāt ʻAlī executed in Istanbul for Hoca Sadettin Efendi (d.1599), renowned şeyhülislâm and tutor of Sultan Murat III (r.1574-1595), by Mehmet Rıza, Rıza-yi Enesi [of Enez in Edirne?]. Poetic excerpts appear to be dated Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1138 [July-August 1726] (see fol.12b, fol.22a, etc.) and 15 Muḥarram 1139 [ca. 12 September 1726] (see fol.1a).', 'Former shelfmark: "198 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of opening leaf (\'title page\').', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in brown leather, doublure hinges (extending under doublures) in scalloped marbled paper (in blue and white) ; upper and lower covers carry gold-tooled ornament (octagonal or lobed diamond shape) built up from interlace pattern, along with tooled and gold-painted border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in white thread, four stations ; overall in fairly good condition with minor staining, etc. ; repair to spine (rebacked) in black leather (gone to gray).', 'Support: non-European laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat indistinct) and occasional chain lines faintly visible, cloudy formation, thick and sturdy, well-burnished ; "leaves" mainly composed of two (occasionally more) leaves layered together, delaminating in several instances, with several now hinged together / guarded with strips of striped textile ; some leaves tinted (mainly yellow) and gold or silver flecked ; seal impressions mounted on decorative papers.', 'Decoration: Gold-flecked bands surround lines of text [Munājāt ʻAlī] ; written area surrounded by gold frame ; seal impressions set in decorative, multi-colored mounts, mainly octagonal, rectangular, oval, sun / star, etc. in shape, cut from assorted papers.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; a large, exquisite hand with elongation and somewhat exaggerated constrast in thickness between horizontal and vertical strokes ; later excerpts in nastaʻlīq and in ruqʻah.', 'Layout: Munājāt ʻAlī written in 10 lines per page ; frame-ruled ; remaining poetic and prose excerpts vary widely, though most are written on the diagonal.', 'Collation: I (2), 4 II(18), I+1 (21), I (23) ; mainly binions and single bifolia ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals.', 'Dedication: As appears on fol.4a, Munājāt ʻAlī executed for Hoca Sadettin Efendi (d.1599), renowned şeyhülislâm and tutor of Sultan Murat III (r.1574-1595).', 'Colophon: [Munājāt ʻAlī] "كتبت لحضرة سلطان العلماء برهان الفضلاء خواجه السلطان الاعظم مالك رقاب الامم السلطان مراد خان دام في حفظ ربنا المستعان سعد الدين افندى لا زالت محامده مذكورة ومأثره مشهورة الى انقراض الزمان الفقير المذنب محمد رضاى انسى النسب في سنة اربع وتسعين وتسعمائة بمحروسۀ قسطنطنية"', 'Explicit: [Munājāt ʻAlī] "وصل عليه ما دعاك موحد وناجاك اخيار ببابك ركع"', 'Incipit: [Munājāt ʻAlī] "لك الحمد يا ذا الجود والمجد والعلى تباركت تعطي من تشاء وتمنع ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '7. fol.23a-fol.23b : [mainly blank].', "6. fol.13b-fol.22b : [assorted former owners' marks and excerpts in verse and prose (including Nâbî, Kāshānī, etc.) with occasional leaves left blank].", '5. fol.13a : [blank].', '4. fol.12b : [dated statement].', '3. fol.10b-fol.12a : [blank].', '2. fol.4b-fol.10a : [collection of seal impressions].', '1. fol.1b-fol.4a : [Munājāt ʻAlī] / ʻAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib.', 'Elegant copy of a majmūʻah with the qaṣīdah in ʻayn, Munājāt ʻAlī, from the dīwān attributed to ʻAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib (ca. 600-661), followed by a collection of seal impressions (decoratively mounted) and a later assortement of excerpts in verse and prose, in Persian and Turkish. Contribution to the cataloguing from Ali Rafi.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1017', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; calligraphic style, paper, etc. would suggest late 18th or early 19th century.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 166', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark olive-green leather ; Type III binding ; board linings and hinges in yellow-tinted paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-tooled mandorla, pendants and border in a series of s-shaped stamps flanked by blind rules ; sewn in heavy lime green thread, six stations ; overall in fairly good condition with minor staining, etc.', 'Support: Wove paper, well-burnished ; written area gold-flecked.', 'Decoration: Written area gold-flecked and surrounded by frame consisting of narrow bands of red, gold, and blue defined by black fillets ; margin also surrounded by black fillets.', 'Script: Naskh ; exquisitely executed, large, bold Persianate hand, reminiscent of the style perfected by Aḥmad Nayrīzī (though with the sharp leftward serif on lām appearing only rarely, e.g. p.28) ; partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on ṭāʼ and ẓāʼ, free-standing alif sans serif and slightly tapered, two dots occasionally written vertically (one above the other), final yāʼ usually unpointed, sweeping descenders, adhering to baseline apart from occasional superscript of letters, fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 9 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 3 IV(24), III (30) ; quaternions followed by final ternion ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "قد تناول الاقرباء اطراف جنازتي وارحم في ذلك البيت المظلم وحشتي وغربتي ووحدتي"', 'Incipit: "الهي البستني الخطايا ثوب مذلتي وجللني التباعد منك لباس مسكنتي ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Superb specimen of calligraphy employing the munājāt attributed to Zayn al-ʻĀbidīn ʻAlī ibn al-Ḥusayn (d.713?), often included in his collection of prayers al-Ṣaḥīfah al-sajjādīyah.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 442', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at close, copy executed by al-Ḥājj Muḥammad Zakarīyā-yi Samarqandī. Date of transcription not specified ; paper, etc. may suggest 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "543 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on upper board lining ; "111" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (recto of leaf carrying incipit page).', 'Binding: Pasteboards (thin, semi-limp) faced in blue-green textile with dark red leather over spine and edges / turn-ins (textile faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; overall in fair condition with minor staining and abrasion, sewing failing, cover detached at spine, etc.', 'Support: European and non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper, all highly sized and burnished ; bifolia appear to be composed of two leaves laminated together and mould markings are therefore difficult to examine in all but the second to last bifolium (which also carries a watermark, difficult to make out) ; some leaves tinted (green-blue / aquamarine and pale yellow ) with facing pages in the same color ; opening added bifolium (serving as flyleaves) in a paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, quite distinct) and no chain lines or watermarks visible), beige in color.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by swirling arabesque in gold with floral motifs in orange-red and pink all on a light-blue ground, surmounted by a scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) filled with same manner of swirling arabesque and floral motifs (in gold, orange-red, pink) on a light-blue ground, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in gold with light-blue accents, and entire piece set in a heavy well of gold ; written area throughout surrounded by heavy frame in a series of narrow gold bands outlined by black fillets ; margin and panels within the written area also outlined in gold bands ; in the first few leaves (through fol.4a), elucidation in Persian surrounded by border evoking the design of the ʻunwān / sarlawḥ, a band of the same falls at the center of the written area ; written area (including outlined margin) gold-flecked to varying degrees.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; verses in a large, exquisite Indian style hand with elongation and somewhat exaggerated constrast in thickness between horizontal and vertical strokes ; elucidation in much smaller and compact hand.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 4 lines of verse and 8 lines of elucidation per page, with lines of verse flanking lines of elucidation (written on the diagonal).', 'Collation: ii, 4 I(8) ; catchwords present.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تمت نسخۀ مناجات حضرت علي رضي الله تعالى عنه على يد اضعف الحقير العبد المذنب الحاج محمد زكرياى سمرقندى غفر له"', 'Explicit: "وناجاك اخيار ببابك ركع يا رب ز توبر رسول صلوه سلام ... بر در كه تو ركوع آرند و قيام"', 'Incipit: "لك الحمد يا ذا الجود والمجد والعلى تباركت تعطي من تشاء وتمنع ای صاحب جود مر ترا حمد و ثنا هستی تو بزرگوار با مجد و علا ..."', 'Title from colophon.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the qaṣīdah in ʻayn, Munājāt ʻAlī, from the dīwān attributed to ʻAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib (ca. 600-661), accompanied by elucidation in Persian, possibly of Ḥaqīrī Tabrīzī (see al-Dharīʻah no.6860, vol.22, pp.237-238). Contributions to the cataloguing from Abbas Zarei Mehrvarz and Hossein Mottaghi.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 420', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon though decoration, hand, etc. would suggest 18th century and date of composition, author's dates and dated seal impressions [including one possibly for the author] would suggest mid to late 18th century. Hikaye-yi garibe likely added later.", 'Binding: Pasteboards (both now almost entirely delaminated) covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; doublures in dark brown leather, hinges and flyleaves in fine marbled paper (in red, dark blue, light blue-green), flyleaves gold-flecked ; upper and lower covers carry large stamped and gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OAi) and pendants accented with gold-painted strokes, as well as gold-painted and tooled borders in rows of s-shaped stamps defined by gold fillets ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, damaged with headband virtually gone, tailband detaching ; overall in poor condition with boards delaminated to individual leaves, flap lost, cover detached from text block at spine, abrasion, lifting and losses of leather (upper cover, exposing boards, and spine in particular), staining, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper of perhaps several types ; mainly with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal or vertical, curving, somewhat indistinct) and no chain lines plainly visible, cloudy formation, thin and trasluscent, well-sized and burnished ; another type with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. and chain lines in pairs (see p.186, etc.) ; some staining ; bifolium in each quire silver-flecked (see pp.85-86, 99-100, etc.).', 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.4 consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by delicate floral designs on fields of gold and dark blue, surmounted by a w-shaped piece overlaid with similar swirling floral designs in light blue, pink, orange, gold, etc. on grounds of gold and dark blue / cobalt, itself surmounted by vertical stalks in dark blue with gold and red accents, all set in a well of heavy gold and black interlace with outermost pink band ; written area of opening work surrounded by a heavy gold frame defined by black fillets ; headings and some keywords rubricated ; textual dividers mainly in the form of inverted commas in red, though two exquisitely executed rosettes appear on incipit page (p.4).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; two elegant Ottoman hands ; opening work (through p.125) a large, clear hand in a medium line, serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline, some elongation and thickening of horizontal strokes, many open counters, pointing mainly in conjoined dots or strokes, bowl of final nūn wide with point set down within ; second work (pp.130-166) in a compact, delicate hand in a fine line, serifless with very slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in conjoined dots or strokes, bowl of final nūn wide with point set down within.', 'Layout: Written in as many as 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 6 V(60), V+1 (71), IV (79), III (85), IV+1 (94), i ; chiefly quinions ; final leaves left blank (pp.167-190) ; catchwords present ; lacunae (typically the space of a single line) left between sections of opening work, likely for rubricated headings ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Incipit: [Münşeat] "كوكب درى سپهر علم وكمال خورشيد منير فلك عز وجلال مفتى الانام شيخ مشايخ الاسلام مرحوم ومغفور له درى محمد افندى حضرتلرينك ... انتظام احوال مكه مكرمه خبرينى متضمن شريف حضرتلرى طرفندن وارد اولان مكتوبك جوابنامه سيدر سلام المنان السبحانى المتلو بلسان سبحانى الذى تطمئن بذكره القلوب وتنزل من حضرات الغيوب ..." ; [Hikaye-yi garibe] "تاب اوران مرايى فهم وعقول وپرایه بندان غوانى روايات ونقول ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on p.127.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '4. p.167-p.190 : [blank].', '3. p.130-p.166 : [Hikaye-yi garibe].', '2. p.126-p.129 : [originally left blank].', '1. p.4-p.125 : Münşeat-i Atıf Efendi / Atıf Mehmet Emin Efendi.', 'Elegant copy of what appears to be a collection of letters compiled by Atıf Mehmet Emin Efendi (d.1771) mainly while he served as secretary (mektupçu / مكتوبجى) for şeyhülislam Dürri Mehmet Efendi (d.1736) during the early part of the reign of Mahmut I (r.1730-1754), compare Isl. Ms. 856. Followed (in a later addition) by Hikaye-yi garibe.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 856', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest late 18th century though excerpt on p.78 (which appears to be a later addition) reports an event dated to 11 Jumādá II 1236 [ca. 16 March 1821] and would thus have been entered after that date.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with description (in hand of E. Husselman ?) "Muḥammad Emin, Effendi. | Inshā | Many Insha\'s in BMCat. of Turk. MSS. but not this. nf. in U of M MSS" (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Slip with notes in hand of Eleazar Birnbaum "Compiler: MEḤMED EMĪN efendi, died near end of 1184 AH (Jan-Mar 1771) | Title: [INŞA or MÜNŞEʼĀT] | In Ottoman Turkish | A collection of stylistic pieces compiled by Mehmed Emīn from documents while he was secretary to DURRĪ Meḥmed efendi | Eleazar Birnbaum JUNE 17 1964" (paginated pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 5', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper, hinges in marbled paper (mainly blue and white) ; upper and lower covers carry tooled and gold painted borders in a series of s-shaped stamps with defining fillets ; label on upper cover carries title and script ("منشات تعليق") ; originally sewn in pale yellow thread, two stations, failed or failing with some gatherings now reinforced in black or white thread, gatherings loose ; endbands virtually gone with only traces of primaries ; overall in somewhat poor condition with lifting and losses of spine leather, abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 21 mm. apart (horizontal) and watermarks of lion rampant on ball in scrollwork (see p.8, 10, 14, 15, 74, 75, etc.), another lion rampant in scrollwork (see p.72, 77, etc.) and "DV" alone (see p.12, 18, 28, 41, etc.) and under diadem (see p.66 and 83 and compare Nikolaev no.569 with three crescents dated 1773) ; thin and transluscent though sturdy, buff to pale yellow in color, well-sized and burnished.', 'Decoration: Fine illuminated headpiece (ʻuwnān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.6 consisting of scalloped w-shaped piece filled with floral vegetal decoration in gold, pink and green, surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and red ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by gold frame, elsewhere written area surrounded by red rule-border ; overlining (section headings, etc.) in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; fine Turkish hand ; serifless with marked effect of tilt to the right and slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and somewhat exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, mainly closed counters.', 'Layout: Written in 21 line per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 4 V(40) ; exclusively quinions ; final leaves ruled but left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (include inserts).', 'Incipit: "طرح افكن نو زمين علم انشا اعجاز نماى طرق حسن بيان واملا بيكيوز سكسن درت سنه سى اواخرنده اناطولى صدارندن منفصلا واصل رحمت ربانى اولان اديب كامل بليغ كريم الخصائل عاطف محمد امين افندى جنابلريكه اوائل زمان محمود خانيده متكا پیراى مشيخت اسلاميه مرحوم مغفور له درى محمد افندى حضرتلرينك مدت معلومه مكتوبجيلر يكن جمع وترتيب اولنان منشأت بديعه ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.5).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of a collection of letters compiled by Atıf Mehmet Emin Efendi (d.1771) while he served as secretary (mektupçu / مكتوبجى) for şeyhülislam Dürri Mehmet Efendi (d.1736) during the early part of the reign of Mahmut I (r.1730-1754) (see opening matter on p.6). For another copy compare Isl. Ms. 420.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 427', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon. "According to the caption, the sixth letter in this compendium (pp. 6-9) is a letter addressed to Hurşid Paşa, the beylerbeyi (governor-general) of Rumelia, by the Grand Vizier Yusuf Ziya Paşa. Yusuf Ziya Paşa was grand vizier twice (1798-1808, 1809-1811). There was also a Hurşid Ahmed Paşa who served as the governor-general of Rumelia during the same period (1807-1813), who is the likely recipient. The provides a terminus post quem for this collection of letters, even if it doesn’t necessarily tell us when it was compiled." - from description provided by András Riedlmayer. Sultan Mahmut II (r.1808-1839) is also mentioned at close on p.243, further elaborating the rough terminus post quem. Considering decoration, paper, hand, etc. in light of these details suggests early to mid 19th century, likely 1830s or 1840s.', 'Former shelfmark: "27 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings and flyleaves in pink surface-dyed and gold-flecked laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry elegant tooled and gold-painted floral spray with tooled rosette accents as cornerpieces and border with guilloché roll flanked by fillets, all in gold ; sewn in dark pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pale yellow and pink, fairly good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; opening type with 10-11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 30-32 mm. apart (vertical) and watermark of scrollwork / floral form on pedestal resembling a vase (see p.6, 20, etc.) ; another type with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal or vertical), chain lines spaced 25-27 mm. (vertical or horizontal) and watermark of lion passant guardant (see p.44, 58, 72, etc.) ; another type with roughly 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (vertical) and watermarks of "GFA" below eagle (p.262, etc.) and lion rampant in shield / arms with crown above (see p.250, 264, etc. and compare nos. 1104a and 1104b dated 1844 in Nikolaev, Watermarks of the Ottoman Empire, volume 1) ; all sturdy, fairly thick though transluscent, and quite well-sized and burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of first section on p.2 consisting of a rectangular piece with cartouche carrying title (for the first letter in the compendium, خرقة شریف تذکره سی) in red flanked by vegetal or plume accents in blue-green on fields of gold, surmounted by scalloped triangular-shaped piece or dome with central floral spray in shades of pink, purple and green surrounded by plume or vegetal designs in shades of blue, purple, pink and white on a gold, partially stippled ground, itself surmounted by five floral bouquets at the apices of the scallops ; illuminated headpiece of similar design (a kind of scalloped triangular-shaped piece or dome with plumes and floral motifs in shades of pink, purple, blue, green, and white on a stippled gold ground) at opening of next section on p.22 ; additional rectangular headpieces appear at the openings of the other sections ; text of written area surrounded by gold frame ; section headings rubricated (through p.214) ; occasional textual dividers in the form of gold rosettes.', 'Script: Naskh ; mainly a clear, compact Turkish / Ottoman hand in a medium line ; partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on occasional lam, curvilinear descenders, open and closed counters, free assimilation of letters, pointing mainly in strokes rather than distinct dots, hamzah on final hāʼ and occasional hamzah ʻalá nabrah mainly in separate strokes resembling two dots (similar to the copyists rendering of tāʼ marbūṭah) ; closing section (pp. 249-285) hand slightly different with additional serifs, and some sweeping descenders, though could have been executed by the same copyist.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled ; final section (pp. 249-285) in roughly 17 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 10 V(100), II+3 (107), V (117), III (123), 2 V(143), i ; pp.17-21 ruled but left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Incipit: "بسملة فاتحة خلقت خاتمة رسالة ختمیت شرف افزای خلعت نبوت زیورارای دوای رسالت ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '5. p.248-p.285 : [what appears to be further copies of official letters].', '4. p.244-p.247 : [left blank, apart from excerpts on p.245].', '3. p.22-p.243 : [collection of letters addressed to various individuals (typically named in the rubricated headings)].', '2. p.17-p.21 : [left blank].', '1. p.2-p.16: "The first four letters in this codex (pp. 2-3; p. 3; pp. 3-4; pp. 4-5) are model letters captioned "Hırka-ı Şerīf Tezkiresi" (Letter [of invitation to visit] the Mantle of the Prophet Muhammad). The fifth letter (p. 5-6) is captioned "Mevlid-i Şerīf da’vetini mutazammın tezkire" (Letter containing an invitation to [attend] a ceremonial recitation of the Mevlid [ode in praise of the birth of the Prophet Muhammad, composed by Süleyman Çelebi]. The first five letters do not appear to include any dates or names of individuals...According to the caption, the sixth letter in this compendium (pp. 6-9) is a letter addressed to Hurşid Paşa, the beylerbeyi (governor-general) of Rumelia, by the Grand Vizier Yusuf Ziya Paşa...The seventh sample (pp. 9-11) is a letter appointing the recipient to the ceremonial post of sweeper (ferrāş) of the tomb of the Prophet in Medina.The eighth sample (pp. 11-12) is a letter of reprimand addressed to an unnamed transgressor." - from description provided by András Riedlmayer.', 'Elegant copy of a collection of correspondence in Ottoman Turkish. Identification and detailed description of contents provided by András Riedlmayer via the "Collaboration in cataloging: Islamic manuscripts at Michigan" project. "This appears to be a collection of models of correspondence, written in Ottoman Turkish, with samples of various categories of letters that show the proper forms of address and formulation of such a letter demanded by protocol according to the occasion and the status of the writer and the recipient." - from description provided by András Riedlmayer.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 860 v.4', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.541, transcription completed Rajab 1070 [March-April 1660].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Recycled card with note "Exchange - note of previous owner | College of Fort William (India)" -- b. Card with note describing contents "(MS) روضة الصفا | rowẓatt al-ṣafā | vol.4 | Date: 1070 AH (1651 ±)" -- c. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Meredith-Owens notes" -- d. Scrap with title and date in ink "Rawḍat al-Safā | vol. 4 AH 1075 ?"', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 9 v.4', 'Binding: Boards covered in light brown leather decorated in "marble calf" manner ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted wove paper ; spine in dark green and brown leather, gold-stamped with decorative bands and title "ROOZUT OL SUFA 4" ; edges of text block red-flecked ; sewn in white thread over recessed cords ; Western style worked endbands, fair condition ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion and deterioration of leather, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat indistinct, curving) and chain lines only faintly visible, cloudy formation, somewhat thin though sturdy, beige to light brown in color, well-burnished ; some breakage and minor pest damage (with repairs).', 'Decoration: Keywords and headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of three inverted commas, etc. (in red) ; occasional overlining in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand in a medium line ; serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline and tilt to the right, elongation and somewhat exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes or conjoined dots (for two and three dots).', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 33 IV(264), IV-2 (370), i ; exclusively quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of black strokes in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf and the lower outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangulare, reads "تمت المجلد الرابع بعون الله تعالى وحسن توفيقه والحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على نبيه محمد واله اجمعين الطيبين الطاهرين تحريرا فى شهر رجب المرجب سنه ۱۰۷۰ هجرى"', 'Incipit: "فهرست نسخه سعادات ابدی و دیباجه مجموعه کرامات سرمدی ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the fourth volume, addressing the dynasties contemporary with the ʻAbbāsids, of the celebrated universal history Rawz̤at al-ṣafāʼ fī sīrat al-anbiyāʼ va al-mulūk va al-khulafāʼ by the Tīmūrid historian Muḥammad ibn Khvāndshāh Mīr Khvānd (d.1498).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 159', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests early 17th century.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 33. Ghazals of Urfi, etc."', 'Binding: Pasteboards (quite thin, approaching semi-limp) covered in combed marbled paper (salmon, blue, etc.) with dark red-brown leather over spine and edges/turn-ins ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns/flyleaves in European laid paper ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; only traces of primaries remain from worked endbands ; overal in poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, moisture damage, delamination of boards, etc.', 'Support: European and non-European laid paper ; European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), watermarks include crossbow in circle with trefoil above (compare Piccard 123860) and symbol looking like a lantern with A (compare countermark in Piccard 123862) in circle, some leaves tinted shades of light green or yellow, quite thin, transluscent, and crisp ; pp.94-114 in non-European laid paper (likely pre-1650, 17th century Persian) with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), no chain lines visible, and whole fibers visible ; flyleaves/pastedowns in European laid paper with crown star crescent watermark ; staining and tide lines ; some fire damage.', 'Decoration: Some headings and keywords rubricated ; written area (including divided panels) of p.94-p.114 surrounded by gilt frame.', 'Script: Mainly nastaʻlīq, sans serif with characteristic descent of words to baseline, superscript of final words and letters at end of many lines, characteristic letterforms , some contrast in thickness of horizontal and vertical strokes and horizontal strokes often elongated ; various excerpts (including odd leaves, likely incorporated as part of repairs/reinforcements, carrying table of contents for a different work) in naskh-nastaʻlīq.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 15 lines per page with written area divided to two columns, final line of each ghazal centered ; pp.94-114, written in roughly 12 lines per page with written area divided to set off four lines on the diagonal (two in each column), two lines at the center of the panel (one in each column), and two lines running vertically ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, I+1 (3), I (5), 3 V(35), V+1 (46), IV (54), II (58), i ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves ; skips two pages between pp.78-79).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '5. p.115 : [partial table of contents].', '4. p.94-p.114 : [Qaṣāʼid, also of ʻUrfī Shīrāzī ?, not appearing in the edition of Javāhirī].', '3. p.13-p.92 : [Ghazalīyāt] / ʻUrfī Shīrāzī.', '2. p.9-p.12 : [Qaṣāʼid] / ʻUrfī Shīrāzī.', '1. p.1-p.8 : [assorted excerpts, including partial table of contents].', 'Fine copy of a selection of poems from the dīvān of ʻUrfī Shīrāzī, namely qaṣāʼid and ghazalīyāt. Accompanied by excerpts from other works and poems, as well a partial table of contents for a different work.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 589', 'Origin: As appears in colophon with patronage statement on fol.363b (p.724), copied for Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Ṣāliḥ al-ʻAnsī. Transcription finished ("wa-kāna al-farāgh min raqmih...") at midday on Thursday, 10th of Jumādá I, 1070 [ca. 23 January 1660]. Place of transcription not specified though patron, content, hand, etc. suggest Yemen.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. -- c. letter on European paper with seal impression, difficult to read, inserted between fol. 143-144 (p.284-285) -- d. cache of exactly 60 slips in European paper (with watermarks: three crescents, coat of arms, horn in circle, bunch of grapes, etc.) of unusual shapes and sizes inserted between fol. 287-288 (p.572-573), bearing traditions, glosses, legal problems, etc. -- e. cache of 7 now detached leaves and slips in European paper (with three crescents watermark, hand and flower watermark) after the final quire, carrying glosses, excerpts, etc.', 'Former shelfmark: From spine label, "IL 177" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather with repairs in black cloth ; Type II (likely, i.e. once with flap, now lost) ; board linings in purple wove paper ; upper and lower covers carry a large blind-stamped central mandorla with light brown leather onlays (filled with vegetal composition of asymmetrical design, incorporating chi clouds - compare Déroche class. NA 1) ; in fair condition with some damage and obvious repairs, though flap lost and volume nearly split in two at spine ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European paper of several types ; two opening leaves and closing flyleaf with laid lines spaced roughly 6 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), single chain lines spaced roughly 25 mm. apart (vertical), three crescents watermark (perpendicular to chains and roughly 82-82 mm. in length) ; next section of added leaves at opening with laid lines spaced roughly 6-7 per cm. (horizontal) and every 5th or 7th laid line especially heavy, chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (vertical) and crown star crescent watermark roughly 62 mm. in length (see p.40, 46, etc.) ; elsewhere in many quires of the codex a paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced roughly 25-28 mm. apart (vertical) and three crescents watermark 78 mm. in length perpendicular to the chains (see p.162, compare motif in Heawood 865).', 'Decoration: Many keywords and section headings fully rubricated or accented with red ink ; others in yellow or green ; textual dividers in the form of black dot in circle often used in the glosses (compare type 3 in Regourd, Catalogue cumulé des bibliothèques de manuscrits de Zabid, fascicule 1) and polychrome (red and green) accents at close, framing colophon (resemble type 13 in Regourd, though polychrome).', 'Script: Naskh ; compact Yemeni hand in a bold line ; virtually serifless with slight effect of inclination to the left, some elongation of horizontal strokes and sweeping descenders, many closed counters, curvilinear descenders, lām alif muḥaqqaqah inclining dramatically to the right, very scarcely pointed (pointing that does appear in distinct dots) ; headings supplied in larger, bolded script that is partially seriffed (approaching tawqīʻ).', 'Layout: Written in 34 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 2 III (12), 3 I (18), III (24), 34 IV (296), III (302), 7 IV (358), 2 III (370), II (374), ii ; chiefly quaternions ; middle of the quire marks appear in the form of numeral ٢ (bāʼ hindīyah) in the upper outer margin of left-hand leaf, lower outer margin of the right-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (repeats p.169-170 and thus off by two pages).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "وكان الفراع من رقمه بفضل الله وعونه ولطفه ومنه ظهيرة يوم الخميس لعله العاشر يوما من شهر جمادى الاولى سنة سبعين بعد الالف والدعا لكاتبه ... مما رقم بعناية مالكه الفقير الامجد النجيب ... محمد بن احمد بن محمد بن صالح العنسي ختم الله لنا وله بالامان ..."', 'Explicit: "هذا هو الاولى في [تحقيق] حكم المخالفة والمناصرة"', 'Incipit: "مقدمه لا يسع المقلد جهلها لمعنى انه لا يجوز له الاخلال بمعرفتها فصل ذكر فيه مولانا عليلم من يجوز له التقليد ومن يحرم عليه وما يجوز التقليد فيه من الاحكام وما لا يجوز فقال ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Selections from al-Mahdī li-dīn Allāh Aḥmad ibn Yaḥyá ibn al-Murtaḍá's commentary on his own al-Azhār fī fiqh al-aʼimmah al-aṭhār, a textbook of Zaydī law, with an exceptional number of notes, glosses, and other matter preceding and following the text, as well as in the margins and on a large number of inserted slips. Contributions to the cataloguing provided by Alison Vacca and Anne Regourd."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 525', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on pp.448-449, copied in Istanbul (Hoca Paşa school) by al-Sayyid Nūḥ ibn al-Sayyid Muḥammad Qūrīchāy (Nuh b. Mehmet Kuriçay). He began the transcription ("qad waqaʻa al-farāgh ʻan taḥrīr hādhihi al-nuskhah al-sharīfah ... badaʼtu bi-kitābatihi [sic]...") in Shaʻbān and completed the transcription (as well as read the copy in the Ayasofya) 11 Shawwāl 1180 [ca. 12 March 1767]. As appears in the ijāzah (certificate of audition) on pp.454-455 dated 1 Muḥarram 1181 [ca. 30 May 1767], the copyist studied the work in the Ayasofya with ʻUmar ibn Muṣṭafá al-Arzanjānī (Ömer b. Mustafa el-Erzincanî, عمر بن مصطفى الارزنجاني) who corrected and authorized his copy for reading/recitation (تلاوة), teaching (تدريس) and further authorized transmission (اجازة).', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (paginated pp.1-2).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 364a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in bright yellow-tinted paper with black and brown leathers over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; sewn in dark brown thread, two stations, many loose gatherings ; overall in poor condition with much abrasion, pest damage, lifting and losses of paper, pasteboard, and leather (particularly fore edge flap), upper cover detaching, spine slant, fore edge flap far too small, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper in several types ; opening type with 11-12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 24-25 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks including grapes (raisin) with crown (see p.12, 17, etc.) and "...EN DAUPHANE..." (see p.10, 19, etc.), crisp, thin and transluscent, dark cream in color ; another type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks including grapes (see p.82) and "A LERISOV EN ROUERGUE ... MOYEN" (see p.74, 75, 77 etc.) ; another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart (horizontal), and crown with scrollwork [?] watermark (see p.94, 95, etc.) ; all well-burnished to glossy with burnisher\'s marks visible (in p.12 it looks as though surface size may have been caught up) ; some staining and tide lines.', "Decoration: Keywords and text being commented upon rubricated (orange-red) through p.85, elsewhere overlined in red ; some rubrics have been written over in black ink (see p.45) ; basmalah at opening (p.6) flanked by 'gold' accents to form a very simple illuminated headpiece ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by 'gold' frame (now to green, possibly verdigris), written area elsewhere surrounded by orange-red rule-border.", 'Script: Naskh ; perhaps three clear Turkish and Persianate hands ; main text in a clear naskh, virtually serifless, with very slight effect of words descending to basline, slight effect of tilt to the left (or right), and partially vocalized ; closing prayers appear to be supplied in a different hand ; ijāzah supplied in still a different hand.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, 10 V(100), V+1 (111), 11 V(221), IV+1 (230) ; chiefly quinions ; final leaves left blank ; lacks proper catchwords but last word of final line on the verso of each leaf is usually repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and flyleaves and mistakenly skips two pages each between pp.213-214 and pp.333-334).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "قد وقع الفراغ عن تحرير هذه النسخة الشريفة من مؤلف النسخة التي الفها ركبت بيدها [كذا] في اسلامبول بمدرسۀ خوجه پاشا بدأت بكتابته [كذا] في شهر شعبان ويسر لي اتمامه في شهر سوال في ليلة احد عشر ليلة الاربعا وقرأتها مع الدرس في ايا صوفيۀ كبير كلها في سنة ثمنانون ومائة والف وانا الفقير المحتاج الى رب الكريم الغفار السيد نوح بن السيد محمد قوريچاي ايالة ارض روم اوقيانى دكلينى يازنى رحمتكله ... تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب"', 'Explicit: "وزيد في بعض النسخ والحمد لله رب العالمين ولا بأس بها وزاد في بعض النسخ وهو حسبنا ونعم الوكيل ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم انتهى وهذا اخر ما تيسرجمعه بعون الله تعالى من شرح الفاسي وغيره مما اخذته عن المشايخ الكرام وما سمحت به القريحة بفتح الفتاح"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله المتفضل بصلاته المنعمة بافضل واكمل صلاته على خير انبيائه ...وبعد فان المهمات العلية والمطالب السنية والمقاصد المرضية البرية الصلاة والسلام على الذات المحمدية ... وقد كان الوافي بهذا الشأن الكافي لاهل العرفان الجامع لانواع الصلاة على سيد الكائنات وما ورد فيها من الكيفيات كتاب دلائل الخيرات المنسوب الى قطب زمانه وفريد اوانه ابو عبد الله محمد بن سليمان الجزولي ... فالتمس مني بعض ذوي الكمال ان اشرحه شرحا ... وسميته لتاريخه [؟] منتج البركات على دلائل الخيرات ..."', 'Title from opening matter (p.9).', 'Ms. codex.', '5. p.456-p.460 : [blank].', '4. p. p.454-p.455 : [ijāzah for the copyist].', '3. p.453 : [blank].', '2. p.449-p.452 : [closing prayers].', '1. p.6-p.449 : Muntij al-barakāt ʻalá Dalāʼil al-khayrāt / Muḥammad ibn Ismāʻīl al-Rayhānī al-Rūmī.', 'Fine copy of the commentary by Muḥammad ibn Ismāʻīl al-Rayhānī (al-Rīḥānī) al-Rūmī (d.1745?) on al-Jazūlī’s (d.1465) celebrated collection of prayers for the Prophet, Dalāʼil al-khayrāt, followed by closing prayers and an ijāzah for the copyist.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 518', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; collation statement on p.203 provides a rough terminus ante quem of 1708 ; paper, etc. suggest mid to late 17th or early 18th century dating.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2) -- b. Portion of a page from a printed book (in Turkish, possibly from a book catalogue) (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, "M. 15" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in light pink laid paper with spine, fore edge flap, and fore edge of upper board in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted European laid paper (watermarks visible) ; sewn in white thread, two stations, many threads broken ; worked endbands in yellow and light blue over red leather core, fair condition thought with losses exposing core ; overall in somewhat poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of paper and leather, flap detaching, delamination of boards, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of two main types ; opening type with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-25 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark (80 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.12, 34, etc.), well-burnished to glossy, thick and sturdy, fairly crisp ; another type with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), and hand / glove watermark (see p.90, compare nos. 11 and 12 in Velkov, Les Filigranes dans les documents Ottoman), thinner and far less glossy.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated in some texts ; overlining in red ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; hāʼ musalsalah of قوله in quite ornate flourishes in red (see p.15, etc.).', 'Script: Naskh ; at least two hands, possibly Egyptian [?] in narrow and bolder lines ; one more angular, cramped and compact ; the other larger and more elegant ; mainly serifless (though occasional serifs irregularly appear) with effect of tilt to the left, elongation of horizontal strokes, curvilinear descenders, open and closed counters, pointing mainly in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page.', 'Collation: 4 V(40), II (44), III (50), 5 V(100), 2 IV(116), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals on the opening recto of each quire, begins again with Sharḥ Muqaddimat al-Sanūsī ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '8. p.205-p.235 : Sharḥ al-taṣawwurāt wa-al-taṣdīq fī al-ʻaqāʼid / Muḥammad ibn Yūsuf al-Sanūsī.', '7. p.204 : [blank].', '6. p.93-p.203 : Sharḥ Muqaddimat al-Sanūsī al-musammāh bi-Umm al-barāhīn / Muḥammad ibn Yūsuf al-Sanūsī.', '5. p.92 [ʻAqīdah ṣaghīrah] / Muḥammad Ibn ʻArrāq [Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn ʻAlī ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān Ibn ʻArrāq al-Kinānī].', '4. p.90-p.91 : al-Fawāʼid / Muḥammad ibn Yūsuf al-Sanūsī.', '3. p.10-p.89 : Kitāb Sharḥ al-Sanūsīyah al-ṣughrá / Muḥammad ibn Yūsuf al-Sanūsī.', '2. p.6-p.9: al-Muqaddimah al-ṣughrá / Muḥammad ibn Yūsuf al-Sanūsī.', "1. p.5 : [opening 'title page' with contents listing, waqf statement, etc.].", "Fine collection (majmūʻah) of several doctrinal treatises on the essentials of faith by Abū ʻAbd Allāh Muḥammad ibn Yūsuf al-Sanūsī (d.1490) along with a brief creed attributed to Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn ʻAlī ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān Ibn ʻArrāq [ʻIrāq] al-Kinānī (d.1526). Contents listing on upper board lining (likely in Yahuda's hand) and on opening 'title page' (p.5)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 504', 'Origin: According to colophon on fol.69b, copied by ʻAbd Allāh ibn Khalīl Chāvush (Abdullah b. Halil Çavuş). Copying of first work completed 3 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1125 [ca. 21 December 1713] (see fol.69b). Copying of second work completed 20 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1125 [ca. 7 January 1714] (see fol.74a). No date given for completion of copying for third work.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 357" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip); head of textblock inscribed "۹۳".', 'Binding: Thin pasteboards covered in red leather; Type III binding (without flap); board linings and flyleaves of machine wove paper; blind-tooled decorative border on upper and lower covers; pasted label on spine; sewn in blue thread, two stations; worked chevron endbands in magenta and dark blue [?], good condition; overall in good condition.', 'Support: European laid paper with roughly 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines (horizontal) spaced 20-24 mm. apart, and watermark of three crescents (tre lune, perpendicular to chains, roughly 85 mm. long, see p.14, 74, etc.), thin though sturdy, dark cream in color, well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Red rule-borders throughout; red discs and geometric figures serve as textual dividers in the final work of the codex; section headings rubricated ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh; very fine, clear, Turkish hand, rounded and tilting slightly to the left with free standing alif sans serif and letters such as lām, ṭāʼ, ẓāʼ serrifed, though inconsistently; unusual form for lām alif ligatures where serif of alif closes to form a round loop not unlike the numeral "۹" (see fol.3b, etc.); all three texts copied in the same hand.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page.', 'Collation: 2 (2), 7 V (72), I (74), IV (82); chiefly quinions; catchwords present; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, begins with folio following the incipit page; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "خاتمة الكتاب اربعينهاى سالكان جامى هست بهر وصول صدر قبول نبود [كذا] فضل حق عجيب وغريب كه ازبعين [كذا] رسى بوصول اثر اربعين اهل سلوك قرب حق رتبه سن قيلور حاصل اوفر تركيسم فضولى مسكين اوله بو اربعينله واصل تمت الكتاب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي عم البلاد بنعمته وارفاده وخص العباد بهدايته وخلق النهار بانواره والليل بسواده والغيم بامطاره والسحاب بارعاده... اما بعد لما رايت قصور همم الناس في طلب العلم ... هداني ذلك ان اجمع لهم مختصرا نافعا في العبادات"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '6. fol. 74b-82b : Tarjamat arbaʻīn ḥadīthan / Mawlānā Nūr al-Dīn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān Jāmī ; Mehmet bin Süleyman Fuzulî.', '5. fol. 69b-74a : Kitāb Fiqh al-akbar / [Abū Ḥanifah].', '4. fol. 3b-69b : [Muqaddimat al-Ghaznawī] / Aḥmad al-Ghaznawī.', '3. fol. 3a : [blank with later notes].', '2. fol. 1b-2b : [table of contents].', '1. fol. 1a : [blank with later notes].', "Contains three works, mainly of Ḥanafī fiqh, including [1] al-Ghaznawī's work on ʻibādāt and [2] al-Fiqh al-Akbar attributed to Abū Ḥanīfah, followed by [3] Jāmī's collection of commentary on forty hadith accompanied by Fuzulî's elucidation in Turkish."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 592', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, hand, etc. suggest 17th century. Ownership statement on 'title page' suggest rough terminus ante quem of 1723.", 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and label on lower cover, "IL 239a" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in shell marbled paper (mainly in shades of brown and blue with pink and yellow accents) with brown leather over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins (framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; sewn in pink thread, four stations ; worked endbands in pink and beige, only traces remain ; overall in somewhat poor condition with much abrasion, staining, some lifting and losses of paper and leather, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27 mm. apart, and anchor in circle watermark (see pp.52-53) ; sturdy, not especially thick, well-burnished to glossy ; staining and some pest damage.', 'Decoration: Keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs and inverted commas.', "Script: Naskh ; elegant Turkish or 'Syrian' hand with slight effect of tilt to the left, thickness and elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots, mainly curvilinear descenders (though some more rectilinear, i.e. rāʼ), rightward descenders tapered, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf).", 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off verses ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 6 V(60), III-1 (65), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Explicit: "وقال بعضهم وبي ذا الرشا الحبشي المي سبي عقلي وكلمني طلامه [؟] ويتم مهجتي لكن بشرط وكان الشرط اخره سلامه تم الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب والحمد لله وحده"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي خلق الانسان صلصال من حماء مسنون وفضل بعضه عن بعض فهم بذلك يتقاوتون ... وبعد فيقول العبد الفير الى الله الصمد علاء الدين محمد بن عبد الباقي البخاري القاضي خاني المكي خطيب المدينة المنورة سابقا ... نسخ لي في هذه الايام الشريفة ... اعي عام احد وتسعين وتسعمائة من الهجرة النبوية ان الف رسالة يستدل بها على فضل الحبوش ... فكنت التقط الفرائد من مناقبهم واجمع الفوائد من محاسنهم مما جاء في ذلك الاحاديث الشريفة والآيات والفوائض اللطيفة والابيات الى ان طفرت برسالتي الشيخ ... جلال الدين السيوطي ... واستغنيت بهما عن سائر الكتب والعدد وانتخبت من احاديثهما ما لا بد منه في المطلوب واضفته الي ما قد كان عندي من مكتوب فصارت بفضل الله تعالى من احسن الرسائل وانفع الوسائل وسميتها بالطراز المنقوش في محاسن الحبوش ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.3) and opening matter (preface) on p.6.", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the treatise in prose and verse on the eminence of the Ethiopians (Abyssinians, Ḥubūsh).'])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated; copyist same as that of Mich. Isl. Ms. 700,2; marginal notes in a different hand; pp. [15-16] include experiments in calligraphy.', 'Terminus post quem date given by note on p. [16]: tajribat al-qalam fī yawm al-sabt tāsiʻ wa-ʻishrīn shahr al-Muḥarram sanat aḥad wa-tisʻīn wa-thamānimiʾah [4 February 1486].', 'Pp. [2-5]. Bound with: al-Muqbil fī ʻilm al-jabr wa-al-muqābalah, pp. [6-14].', '"A poem on algebra with unidenfified commentary (not that of Sibṭ al-Māridīnī or of Zakarīyaʾ al-Anṣārī)." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Illuminated ʻunwān on p. [1]; text rubricated in gold and red; text enclosed within gold borders; foliation in hand of copyist; illuminated colophon; edges gilded in foliate patterns.', 'wa-miʾah wa-alf.', 'Date and names of copyists in colophon: fa-qad kāna taḥrīr al-kitāb al-Ṣaḥīḥ al-mansūb ilá al-imām ... katabahu al-faqīr ... al-ḥājj Maḥmūd ibn Isḥāq al-shahīr bi-imām jāmiʻ mawlīnā mullā Kastad al-wāqiʻ fī al-Qusṭanṭinīyah al-muḥammīyah ... wa-anā ... ʻAbd Allāh ʻUmar Afandī Zādah kātib sarāy Mumāyūn wa-anā al-maʾdhūn bi-al-ḥadīth ... min al-shaykh ... al-murshid fī ṭarīq al-Naqshabandī ... al-mushtahar bi-al-shaykh Muṣṭafá al-ʻAfwī thalāth wa-sittīn', '"One of the two great and accepted collections of traditions [of the prophet Muḥammad]." Cataloging by William Hoyt Worrell, 1925.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 149', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.361, copied by Aḥmad ibn Ḥasan with transcription completed ("qad tamma hādhā al-kitāb ... bi-qalam...") in the year 1248 [1832 or 3].', 'Accompanying materials: Inserts in wove paper carrying notes (paginated pp.9-10 and pp.83-84).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 127. Kitab al-mutawwal, commentary on al-Bayan of al-Talkhis." ; "٤٠٩" on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (in yellow, blue, and pink) with red over spine, foredge flap and edges/turn-ins ; board linings in laid paper ; green lining at interior of foreedge flap and spine ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; endbands in white thread over leather core, lost at head and showing remains at tail ; spine has been repaired at head and tail with strip of red leather pasted across spine ; repair at tail is partially lost and leather over spine is splitting ; leather at head and tail of spine cracking and abraded and endbands damaged but otherwise codex is sound, in overall fair condition.', 'Support: European laid paper with 13 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal) ; watermarks include eagle and a bird within scrollwork.', 'Decoration: Fine headpiece on incipit page (p.2) consisting of rectangular panel carrying the basmalah surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) containing swirling floral design in reddish-pink on light reddish-pink field ; tailpiece (p.361) surrounding triangular explicit and colophon in field of light reddish-pink including swirling floral design in similar reddish-pink ink ; written area throughout surrounded by red rule-border ; section headings, notabilia (sideheads), some interlinear corrections and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; text commented upon overlined in red ; textual dividers in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; bold, heavy line ; compact ; slight tilt to left; adheres to baseline ; freely ligatured (with final hāʼ or tāʼ marbūtah assimilated with previous rāʼ or dāl) ; rightward descenders tapered ; counters tend to be open ; superscripting of final letters such as nūn following alif ; prominent waw with striking open counter ; partially vocalized, in same black ink ; interlinear and marginal glosses in several different hands while some glosses appear to be in same hand as main text.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 18 V (360) ; entirely quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "قد تم هذا الكتاب المطول شرح التلخيص بقلم احمد بن حسن في سنة ثمان و اربعين و ماتين و الف غفر الله لهما و اليه رحم الله لمن نظر و قراء و استفاده و دعاء لكاتبه ان وجد فيه سهو و خطاء يصحح و لا يعيب لان الانسان لا يخلو من الخطاء و النسيان م م م"', 'Explicit: "قوله يظهر ذلك بالتامل مع التذكر لما تقدم من الاصول المذكورة فى الفنون الثلثة وتفاصيل ذلك مما لا نفى لها الدفاتر لا يمكن الاطلاع على كنهها الا لعلام الغيوب هذا اخرما اردنا جمعه من الفوائد و نظه من الفرائد مع توزع البال...و الحمد لله و لي الانعام و الصلوة على محمد واله عليه و عليهم السلام في جميع الاعوام برحمتك يا ارحم الراحمين بعون الله الملك الوهاب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذى الهمنا حقائق المعانى ودقائق البيان وخصصنا ببدائع الايادى وروائع الاحسان ... وبعد فان احق الفضائل بالتقديم واسبقها فى استيجاب التعظيم هو التحلى بحقائق العلوم والمعارف ...وكثيرا ما يحالج قلبي ان اشرح كتاب تلخيص المفتاح ... بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الحمد لله افتح كتابه بعد التيمن بالتسمية بحمد الله تعالى"', 'Title from colophon on p.361.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the commentary by al-Taftāzānī on Talkhīṣ al-Miftāḥ by Jalāl al-Dīn al-Qazwīnī (d. 739/1338), an abridgment of the third part of Miftāḥ al-ʻulūm by al-Sakkākī (d. 626/1229), on ʻIlm al-maʻānī wa-al-bayān. Description provided mainly by Sarah Mirza.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 661', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.76, opening work copied by Aḥmad al-Hānī al-Hilālī with transcription completed 1130 [1717 or 18]. As appears in colophon on p.188, transcription of second work completed around the time of the mawlid (birthday of the Prophet) 1188 [1774].', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 378" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in block-printed paper (rows of interlaced curves in red, studded with aquamarine accents in dots and strokes, all on a bright orange ground) with brown leather over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins (framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted paper ; tooled accents on fore edge flap ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in mauve and cream, good condition ; text block trimmed around marginalia ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, cover detaching at spine, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper ; mainly with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark (88 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.14, 26, 34, 35, etc.), sturdy and well-burnished ; another type with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 31 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark (82 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.108, etc.), sturdy and somewhat thick, burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; written area of incipit and facing page of opening work surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Maghribī ; two main hands ; hand supplying opening work quite neat and uniform, exhibiting little deviation from the vertical and adhering closely to the baseline, with characteristic sweeping descenders, etc. ; hand supplying second work less uniform, occasional tilt to the right or left, etc. ; opening leaf of second work seemingly supplied in a different hand.', 'Layout: Written in 23 and 24 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 3 V(30), II (34), I (36), V-1+1 (46), V (56), IV (64), V (74), IV (82), V (92) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: [Muwaṣṣil al-ṭullāb] "Scribal," triangular, reads "كمل بحمد الله وحسن عونه على يد كاتبه الفقير الى ربه الراجي عفو مولاه الشريف احمد الهاني الهلالي وكان الفراغ منه يوم الخميس في ثلالثة [ايام؟] بقين من [...؟] عام ثلاثين ومائة والف تم الكتاب وانقضى وفعلنا الذي وجب رحم الله من قرأ ومن دعا للذي كتب" ; [Sharḥ Umm al-barāhīn] "Scribal," triangular, reads "وكان الفراغ منه يوم الثلاثة انتهى بمولده صلى الله عليه وسلم عام ثمانية وثمانين ومائة والف ..."', 'Incipit: [Muwaṣṣil al-ṭullāb] "الحمد لله الملهم بحمده ... وبعد فيقول العبد الفقير الى مولاه الغني خالد بن عبد الله الازهري هذا شرح لطيف على قواعد الاعراب ..." ; [Sharḥ Umm al-barāhīn] "الحمد لله الواسع الجود والعطاء الذي شهد بوجوب وجوده ... وبعد فاهم ما يشتغل به العاقل اللبيب في هذا الزمان الصعب ان يسعى فيما ينقذ به مهجته من الخلود ... سميته موصل الطلاب الى قواعد الاعراب ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '3. p.78-p.188: ʻAqīdat ahl al-tawhīd al-ṣughrá al-musammá bi-Umm al-barāhīn / Abū ʻAbd Allāh Muḥammad ibn Yusūf al-Sanūsī.', '2. p.77 : [blank].', '1. p.6-p.76 : Muwaṣṣil al-ṭullāb ilá qawāʼid al-iʻrāb / Khālid ibn ʻAbd Allāh al-Azharī.', "Fine Maghribī copy of the commentary by Zayn al-Dīn Khālid ibn ʻAbdallāh al-Azharī (d.1499) upon Ibn Hishām's popular grammatical textbook, Qawāʻid al-iʻrāb, followed by a commentary by Abū ʻAbd Allāh Muḥammad ibn Yūsuf al-Sanūsī (d.1490) upon his own ʻAqīdat ahl al-tawhīd al-ṣughrá, or Umm al-barāhīn, on the essentials of faith."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 860 v.2', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.1156 (and in inscription on inner front flyleaf, p.1), latter section (p.679 to close) copied by Sayyid Mihr ʻAlī ʻAẓīmābādī with transcription completed 19 Shawwāl 1241 [ca. 27 May 1826]. Opening section likely copied around the same time.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Meredith-Owens notes" -- b. Slip with note "12-29-65 Mr. Partington just brought in these 2 v. of MSS D" -- c. Scrap with note in black ink "Rawḍat al-Safā vol. 2 AH 1241"', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 9 v.2', 'Binding: Boards covered in light orange-brown leather decorated in "marbled calf" manner ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in a light-blue surface-dyed wove paper ; spine in dark green and brown leather, gold-stamped with decorative bands and title "ROOZUT OL SUFA 2" ; edges of text block red-flecked ; sewn in white thread over three recessed cords ; worked Western style endbands in fair condition with tailband detaching ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion and deterioration of leather, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian or Persian) laid paper of two main types ; opening type (carrying pp.9-678) with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal or vertical, somewhat indistinct, some curving) and chain lines irregularly visible, somewhat cloudy formation, thin and transluscent though sturdy, burnished, dark cream in color ; opening three leaves and leaves carrying p.679 to close mainly in a paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical or horizontal, somewhat indistinct, curving) and no chain lines clearly visible, somewhat cloudy formation, sturdy, well-burnished, cream in color.', 'Decoration: Keywords and headings rubricated ; overlining and occasional textual dividers in the form of three dots also in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; two main hands ; opening three leaves (pp.4-8) and final section (pp.679-1156) supplied in a fine hand in a medium line, serifless and compact with elements of shikastah, effect of words descending to baseline and tilt to the right, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots ; text of pp.9-678 in another much finer nastaʻlīq, serifless and spacious with horizontal strokes in a heavy line, somewhat exaggerated contrast in thickness of horizontal and vertical strokes, effect of words gently descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, IV+2 (10), 56 IV(458), IV+2 (468), 13 IV(572), III (578), ii ; almost exclusively quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of oblique black strokes in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf and the lower outer corner of the left-hand leaf (through p.678) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تم المجلد الثانی ... بتاریخ نوزدهم شهر شوال سنه ۱۲۴۱ یکهزار و دو صد و چهل و یک تحریر على ید المذنب المحتاج سید مهر علی عظیم آبادی غفر الله له وستر عیوبهم وسلم تسلیما ..."', 'Incipit: "عنوان صحیفه مرادات و فهرست مجموعه حادثات ..."', 'Title from inscription on inner flyleaf (p.1).', 'Ms. composite codex.', 'Fine copy of the second volume, addressing the Prophet and al-Khulafāʼ al-Rāshidūn, of the celebrated universal history Rawz̤at al-ṣafāʼ fī sīrat al-anbiyāʼ va al-mulūk va al-khulafāʼ by the Tīmūrid historian Muḥammad ibn Khvāndshāh Mīr Khvānd (d.1498).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 612', "Origin: As appears in colophon beginning on p.[82], copied by Ibn Maḥmūd al-Rashshāsh al-Rifāʻī. Final folio with complete date of transcription lacking. Paper and hand suggest 19th century. Possible date in inscription on cover (1893) and date in statement on 'title page' (p.1) (1308 [1890]) provide approximate termnius ante quem of 1893.", 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inscription on inner front cover and label on lower cover, "IL 106" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in shell marbled paper (best seen on envelope flap) with red leather on spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings of European wove paper ; paper label with title inscription and possible date or shelfmark "حوض الحيات صاحب ۱۸۹۳" on upper cover ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in cream and purple ; in somewhat poor condition with loss of marbled paper, lifting of leather and paper, delaminating of boards, much staining, abrasion and moisture damage ; housed in envelope.', 'Support: European wove paper (likely 19th century) with embossed mark (or "imitation watermark") with "اثر جديد عهد همايون" inside tabula ansata (30 x 15 mm.) appearing at various places throughout (even upper board lining, see p.18, 34, 72, etc.) ; some blocking due to tacky ink has lifted ink of text in some places.', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with section headings, keywords, symbols, etc. in red.', "Script: Naskh ; clear, neat 'Syrian' hand in a medium to bold line ; mainly sans serif though occasional serifs on lām of definite article and alif of lām alif ligature, mainly open counters, the lām alif al-mukhaffafah preferred, kāf mashkūlah preferred (even for final kāf), very slight effect of slant to the left, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ often unpointed.", 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 3 V(30), VI-1 (41) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Hindu-Arabic numerals, center of the upper margin ; one run beginning from incipit page of first work, second beginning with incipit page of second work ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly skips two pages between what are marked p.65-66, hence final pagination is off by two).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "قد تم كتابة هذا الكتاب على يد الفقير الى الله خادم ... الفقرا والمساكين ابن محمود الرشاش الرفاعي يس [?] كان الله له عائنا ومعين ... وكان الفراغ من كتابته في يوم الثلاثة..."', 'Explicit: "قال فلما اطلعت راسي في هذا الشباك وجدت وزير سيدي الى هو انا والوزير عكسي ... ثم قال الواحد في الواحد واحد ووجد نفسي هي هي وانا عكسه والسلام والله الموفق وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين والحمد لله رب العالمين واله الطاهرين امين"', 'Incipit: "[al-Muwāzanah] الحمد لله كاشف لطائف الاسرار لدار باب الهمم والابصار بما منح من معارف الانوار... [Ḥawḍ al-ḥayāt] و صلى الله علي سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين الحمد لله رب العالمين المنزه عن ذات الانداد ذاته المقدس عن صفات الاضداد صفاته وصلاته وسلامه علىسيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم تسليما اما بعد فان في بلاد الهند كتابا معتبرا معروفا عند حكمائها علمائها يسمي حوض الحياة..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from close of opening work and headin for second work on p.34.', 'Ms. codex.', '2. p.34-p.[82] : Ḥawḍ al-ḥayāt / [Rukn al-Dīn al-ʻAmīdī].', '1. p.1-p.34 : al-Muwāzanah / [Ibn ʻArabī].', 'Clear copy of al-Muwāzanah attributed to Ibn ʻArabī followed by Ḥawḍ al-ḥayāt, the Arabic translation of the Amrtakunda, a Hatha yoga text. Ḥawḍ al-ḥayāt, also known by the title Mirʼāt al-maʻānī fī idrāk al-ʻālam al-insānī, and the Persian translation of the Amrtakunda are often attributed to Rukn al-Dīn Abū Ḥāmid Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-ʻAmīdī al-Samarqandī. Ḥawḍ al-ḥayāt has been mistakenly attributed to Ibn ʻArabī in numerous manuscripts located in Istanbul. For a detailed discussion of this text, its different versions, and possible authorship see C. Ernst, "The Islamization of Yoga in the Amrtakunda Translations".'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 91', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.404b, copied by Saʻd [or Suʻd ?] ibn ʻAlī ibn Aḥmad ibn ʻAlī ibn Muslim ibn Sulaymān (identified in . Copying finished ("qad awqafa ʻinān al-qalam ʻan al-sayr fī maydān al-kitābah wa-al-raqm...") between noon and early afternoon of Tuesday, beginning of Dhū al-Qaʻdah, in the year 1157 [December 1744] in a district of Pāchān [likely Paçan in Van]. Scribal verses and a note on the exemplar (a copy that had been copied from a copy of the author) appear in the copyist\'s hand adjacent to the colophon.', 'Accompanying materials: a. scrap of paper with notes, sums, and seal impressions (one dated 1301 [1883 or 4]) between fol.56-57 -- b. tinted leaf from another text between fol.365-366.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 155. Commentary on Multaka al-abhur."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered with dark red leather; Type II binding (with flap); upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped central mandorla in simple vegetal design (very worn and difficult to make out but seemingly not symmetrical) as well as blind-tooled rosettes and lines forming a panel design surrounding the central ornament; design continues on flap; sewn in heavy rose thread, two stations; traces of worked endbands (head and tailband cores and primaries) though with much loss; overall in somewhat poor condition though with sound sewing and attachment to text block, upper cover detaching via split repair, abrasion, staining, etc.; several reapirs to spine in dark brown leathers.', 'Support: Mainly European laid paper with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27-30 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents (tre lune) watermark (roughly 85 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see pp.32, 64, 218, 220, etc.), quite dense and sturdy, cream in color, well-burnished; several leaves at close in a thinner European laid paper; flyleaves added at front and end of the textblock are of still a different European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Text rubricated; overlinings, chapter headings and section headings in red.', 'Script: Naskh; clear Turkish / Eastern Anatolian hand in a medium line; virtually serifless with slight effect of inclination to the left, occasional slight effect of words descending to baseline, pointing mainly in strokes rather than distinct dots, some sharp, straight descenders (rāʼ, etc.), freely ligatured with point of nūn often assimilated with bowl, elsewhere point fully encircled by bowl; many glosses in the same hand as the main text.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page.', 'Collation: iv, II (4), 4 V (44), IV (52), 2 V (72), VI (84), 8 V (164), V+1 (175), 4 V (215), IV (223), 14 V (363), V-1 (372), 2 V (392), VI (404), 7 (411), i; chiefly quinons; quire signatures (numbering) in the form of "راس الكراس ٢", etc. on outer corner of the first folio of each quire beginning from the second quire and continuing through the seventeenth, thereafter marked inconsistently and without number (i.e., "راس الكراس" only); catchwords present, nearly centered under the final line of text on the verso of each folio; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, begins following incipit page with "٢", skips a leaf and repeats "۵۳" on two separate leaves in error; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (referenced in cataloguing); fol.4a-5b and fol.405a-405b are blank and unmarked apart from a stray line of the table of contents and a few notes.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "قد اوقف عنان القلم عن السير في ميدان الكتابة والرقم في وقت ما بين الظهر والعصر في يوم الثلثاء في اوائل ذي القعدة المحرمة من شهور سنة سبع وخمسين ومائة والف من هجرة من له السعادة والشرف صلى الله تعالى عليه وسلم الفقير العاجز الزليل المحتاج الى مغفرة ربه ورحمة العزيز الجليل اقل الاقلين علما واجل الاجلين جرما قليل الاحسان كثير العصيان اذا غاب لم يذكر واذا آب لم يعرف [؟] سعد بن علي بن احمد بن علي بن مسلم بن سليمان عفي عنه وعنهم الملك الروؤف الديان سبحانه ... في سنة ١١٥٧ كتبته في محله سنيسه [؟] صانها الله تعالى عن البليه [؟] من محلات پاچان"', 'Explicit: "على ما وعد بالزيادة في الخطبة ولم ازد شيئا من غيرهما اي من غير الدراية ومجمع البحرين حتى يسهل الطلب على من اشتبه عليه صحة شي مما ليس في الكتاب الاربعة"', 'Incipit: " الحمد لله الذي من علينا باحياء طهارة القلوب ... اما بعد فان الراجي عفو ربه الكريم ... عبد الرحيم بن ابي بكر بن سليمان المسلوى المرعشي يقول بعون الله تعالى ان الكتاب الموسوم بملتقى الابحر حري... فسميتها بالمعاذل [كذا] ... كتاب الطهارة..."', 'Title from opening fol.6b.', 'Ms. codex.', "Commentary on al al-Ḥalabī's Multaqá al-abḥur, a treatise of Ḥanafī fiqh. Includes table of contents. Many notes appear preceding and following the text."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 90', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.605, copied by Amīr Aḥmadʻzādah ʻAlī al-Ḥājj (Emir Ahmetzade Ali) with transcription finished ("qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min al-Muʻādil...") in Jumādá II 1174 [January-February 1761].', 'Accompanying materials: Several slips carrying glosses, notes, etc. (paginated pp.37-38, pp.245-246 [markings only, no writing and decoratively trimmed in the shape of a helmet or dome], pp.411-412, pp.459-460).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 119. Multaka al-abhur, with commentary."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, now lost) ; board linings in pink-tinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers bear blind-stamped scalloped mandorla and cornerpieces with recessed onlays, along with tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in cream or light pink thread, two stations, loose or gone in several places ; in quite poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of leather (especially at spine and hinges), loss of flap, upper and lower covers detaching at spine, textblock split through spine, moiture damage, delamination of boards, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types, mainly with 11-12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart (horizontal), and grapes below letters watermark (also name, difficult to read, see pp.482-83); another type, lighter in color, bears 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 20-22 mm. apart (horizontal), and three hats watermark ; staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; overlining in red ; written area surrounded by red rule-border throughout ; diagram in the margin of p.345.', 'Script: Naskh with influence of nastaʻlīq ; elegant Persianate [?] hand ; partially seriffed with left-sloping head serifs appearing occasionally on lām of definite article, etc. ; effect of words descending to baseline ; elongation of horizontal strokes ; compact with mainly closed counters ; point of final nūn occasionally assimilated with bowl ; kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred.', 'Layout: Written in 31 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, VI (12), IV (20), 2 V(40), VI (52), 25 V(302), VI (314) ; chiefly quinions ; sexternions at opening and close mainly carry contents listing (pp.8-13) and extratextual material (masāʼil, excerpts from other works, notes, etc.) ; final two leaves left blank ; catchwords present (often in lower inner margin to the left of the final line on the recto of each leaf) or last word of final line on the verso is repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf ; skips two pages each between pp.5-6 and pp.601-602 and repeats ten pages dropping from p.549 to p.540).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "قد وقع الفراغ من المعادل غفر لطالبه الملك العادل ولاستاذه ووالديه [؟] ولمن محبا [؟] دعا اليه على يد الضعيف الحقير المحتاج امير احمد زاده علي الحاج في اربع وسبعين والف ومائة في جمادى الاخرى في يوم الجمعة من الهجرة النبوية"', 'Explicit: "حتى يسهل الطلب على من اشتبه عليه صحة شيء مما ليس في الكتب الاربعة الحمد لله على التمام والصلوة على محمد عليه الصلوة والسلام واصحابه الكرام اللهم اجعله ذخرا نافعا في يوم الحشر والقيام بحرمة انبيائه الكرام العظام"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي من علينا باحياء طهارة القلوب … وبعد فان الراجي عفو ربه الكريم ... عبد الرحيم بن ابي بكر بن سليمان المسلو المرعشي يقول بعون الله ان كتاب الموسوم بملتقى الابحر كتاب حري ... فسميتها بالمعادل"', 'Title from opening on p.16.', 'Ms. codex.', "Commentary on al al-Ḥalabī's Multaqá al-abḥur, a treatise of Ḥanafī fiqh. Includes table of contents (pp.8-13) and extensive extratextual material (masāʼil, notes, excerpts from other works, etc.) preceding and following the text."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 58', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon. Paper would suggest early to mid 17th century. Note below close on fol.174a (p.349) appears to indicate that the text is in the hand of Muḥammad Chalabī [...?] al-Shaykh Yūsuf Afandī al-Qādirī ibn al-Ḥājjī [...?], "هذا الكتاب المستطاب بخط محمد چلبى ... الشيخ يوسف افندى القادرى بن الحاجى ...".', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 91. Muin al-hukkam."', 'Binding: Limp dark brown leather (unusual grain) with spine in black leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; linings in shell marbled paper (blue, pink, yellow, red, orange, green, etc.) ; upper and lower covers bear blind-tooled fillets bordering three sides (excluding that adjacent to the spine) ; first three quires sewn in cream thread (likely repairs), remaining in red thread, two stations ; endbands in blue and cream, poor condition ; spine label carries title, subject and language "هذا كتاب معين الحكام في فقه الحنفية عربي" ; in fair condition with abrasion, detaching of upper cover, lifting of spine leather, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of at least two types ; mainly with 7 laid lines per cm. vertical) and single chain lines spaced roughly 30 mm. apart (horizontal), three crescents watermark (compare Heawood 863-864), fairly thick ; other type with 13 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and single chain lines spaced roughly 26 mm. apart (horizontal), crossbow in circle (with trefoil above) watermark (compare Piccard nos.123860 and 123861), thinner ; lightly burnished ; not evenly trimmed ; worn with much staining.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, abbreviations, and notabilia (side-heads) rubricated ; overlining in red ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas, three inverted commas, etc.', 'Script: Naskh with influence of nastaʻlīq ; Persian or Transoxanian hand (?) ; sans serif ; effect of words descending to baseling ; chiefly closed counters ; quite rounded and somewhat freely ligatured ; two dots in the form of inverted caret, three dots assimilated to a single flourish ; occasional ligature for kāf followed by alif, with alif curving up to meet the bar of the kāf (shaqq) forming a closed loop.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, I (2), 16 V(162), V+1 (173), I (175) ; chiefly quinions ; fol.122b (p.246) left blank, unmarked ; final leaf carries table of contents ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (begins with ۱ on page facing incipit page, mistakenly omits ٤٤, ٦٦, etc.) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during digitization, includes front flyleaf).', 'Explicit: "فان حالي ما شرحته في شرح كتاب الوقاية وهو مشهور والحمد لله العلي الغفور وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين وسلم تسليما دائما كثيرا الى يوم القرار"', 'Incipit: "تبارك الذي ابدع الموجودات بقدرته وصنع انواع المخلوقات بعظمته ... اما بعد فان الله تع اكمل لنبيه محمد صلى الله عليه وسلم دينه القويم ... لان الغرض بهذا التأليف ذكر قواعد هذا العلم وبيان ما تفصل به الاقضية من الحجج واحكام السياسة الشرعية وعدم الاستغناء باحدهما عن الاخر وسميته معين الحكام فيما يتردد بين الخصمين من الاحكام ..."', "Title from 'title page' (fol.3a/p.7).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Clear copy of the work on jurisprudence ; preceded by table of contents.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 990', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.21, apparently copied in Egypt by Muḥyī al-Dīn al-Kurdī (head muqriʼ in the Sulṭān Qalāwūn complex [?]) with transcription completed 19 January 1919.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 139', 'Binding: Boards covered in black textured cloth ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a geometric pattern (resembling a scale pattern) in olive green or dull gold ; cover gold-stamped with "معتقد اهل البهاء" ; sewn in white thread, six stations ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Wove paper.', 'Decoration: Some headings, glosses and corrections rubricated ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant modern hand in a thin to medium line ; mainly serifless with effect of tilt to the left, slight effect of words descending to baseline, curvilinear descenders, open and curved counters, pointing in strokes or conjoined dots (typically oriented vertically), final yāʼ usually unpointed, partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 11 and 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, VII (14), i ; a single septenion ; final leaves left blank (see pp.22-28) ; catchwords present ; pagination mainly in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal [?]," reads "حرر ذلك بقلم الفاني [؟] محيي الدين الكردي ... شيخ المقرئ [القراء] بسلطان قلاون بمصر في ١٩ يناير سنه ١٩١٩"', 'Explicit: "نزلت في الكتب والصحف السماوية من قبل وبدليل التقرير والمعجزات ونختتم كيفية الاستدلال في ضمن اربع فصول ان شاء الله"', 'Incipit: "اعلم ايها الباحث الفاضل الجليل ايدك الله بروح منه انه لا يخفى عليك ان من يتبع الكتب السماوية وينظر فيها بنظر التدقيق والتحقيق ويتصفحها بالتأمل والتدبر يعرف ويعلم بان الكتب المنزلة على الانبياء والصحف المقدسة باجمعها مملوءة بالبشارات العظمة ومتفقون على خبر واحد ..."', 'Title from inscription at opening on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of a concise Bahai tract.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 669', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.320a, copy finished on Tuesday the last of Dhū al-Qaʻdah 921 [ca. 5 January 1516].', 'Accompanying materials: Scrap of laid paper found between fol.196-197 (p.392-393) with excerpt from another work in hand similar to the hand in which some glosses are supplied.', 'Former shelfmark: From spine label and inscription on interior of upper cover, "IL 239" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Heavy pasteboards covered in black cloth and black leather over spine (quater binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves of green wove paper ; spine ridges with gold-stamped fillets and accents, as well as title and author"طبقات الصوفية | الجامي" ; in fair condition, though leather is badly worn and rotting, and upper cover is detaching from spine leaving upper board exposed.', 'Support: Mainly European paper with laid lines running vertically, spaced roughly 10 laid lines per cm., single chain lines running horizontally spaced roughly 32-38 mm. apart, and font with lid and cross / flower (or cardinal’s mitre / chapeau) watermark (see p.4, 88, 92, 100, etc.), heavily sized and burnished (burnishers marks visible) ; few inclusions ; a few leaves with laid lines running horizontally and chain lines running vertically ; at least one leaf of non-European paper (see p.96).', 'Decoration: Illuminated frontispiece on fol.1a (p.1) evokes book cover decoration ; large gold-filled scalloped mandorla (likely intended to carry title or ex libris but empty) with pendants carrying floral design in black light blue-green and pink-lavender, all outlined in black fillet with white band ; corner pieces carry vegetal design in blue, white, red, pink-lavender, light blue-green, gold, and black outlines on a field of gold with lapis lazuli accents ; remaining area of panel is filled with swirling vegetal design in red, white, pink-lavender, light-blue, gold, and black outlines on a field of lapis lazuli, entire area outlined in white band with black fillet ; entire piece is framed in a series of gold bands (varying thicknesses) outlined by black fillets ; simple illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) on fol.1b (p.2) consists of triangular piece in gold filled with gold vegetal design ; elaborate frame consisting of two gold bands (of two different thicknesses) outlined by black fillets and an outermost blue fillet appears throughout; incipit and facing page (fol.1b-2a / p.2-3) decorated with gilt cloud-bands ; textual dividers in the form of three dots, etc. in red ; text rubricated with section headings, names for each biographical entry, textual dividers, some overlinings, etc. in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Ottoman hand in a medium to bold line ; characteristically serifless with gentle effect of words descending to the baseline, sweeping descenders, final or free-standing nūn with point nearly assimilating with return stroke of wide, tall bowl, point, hāʼ mudghamah looking like two inverted commas, one over the other, pointing (two and three dots) in distinct or conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, 12 VI (144), V (154), 13 VI (310), V+1 (321), i ; chiefly sexternions ; catchwords present ; final leaf blank but without missing text, likely once served as flyleaf, not accounted for in foliation ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals continues through fol.320 ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," roughly triangular, essentially unpointed, reads: "والحمد لله على الاتمام والصلوه على خير الانام وآله البرره الكرام والسلام على من اتبع الهدى تم الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب يوم الثلثاء في اخر شهر المبارك ذى القعده في تاريخ سنة ٩٢١"', 'Explicit: كارشان جز نفى ذات و وصف فعل خويش نيست ای خدا چبود كه جامى را كنى در كارشان. رباعيه في تاريخ اتمامه ... و سيوم گشت تمام', 'Incipit: الحمد لله الذي جعل مرائي قلوب اوليائه مجيالى وجهه الكريم والاح منا على صفايح وجوهم لوايح نوره القديم', 'Title from preface on fol.2b (p.4).', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Jāmī's (817-898/1414-1492) prized collection of biographies of Ṣūfīs and saints accompanied by a comprehensive study of Sufism."])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated and enclosed within borders of red and black; marginal corrections in hand of copyist.', 'Date from Quaritch catalog description.', 'Text (not this copy) published.', '"Stories of the prophets and others mentioned in the Koran." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 273', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon. According to note on 'title page' (fol.1a/p.1) executed by the renowned Timurid calligrapher Sulṭān ʻAlī Mashhadī (d.1520). Relatively consistent with his style and thus likely executed late 15th or early 16th century. Mounting and illumination possibly later in the 16th century.", 'Former shelfmark: "٢١" and "216 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" in pencil on front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather ; Western style binding (without flap) ; board linings in shell marbled paper (mainly in lavender, pink, and yellow-green) ; upper and lower covers carry gold-painted rules and tooled border in a series of annular stamps ; now sewn in white thread, four stations ; overall in fairly good condition with some staining and minor abrasion though fully detached from text block ; while cover is not sized to be flush with text block, this appears to have been intentional as adhesive paper pattern on interior of spine matches that on spine of text block.', 'Support: non-European (Persian) laid paper ; written area mounted in a frame of exquisite silhouette paper (laid with 6 laid lines per cm., chains occasionally visible, sturdy, well-burnished) in two floral compositions, one with floral vegetal motifs only, the other with bird motifs as well ; recto of each framing leaf in pastel blue and verso in pink (quite possibly composite with leaves of two distinct tints affixed to each other).', 'Decoration: Superbly executed illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on fol.1b (p.2) consisting of a rectangular piece with gold cartouche surrounded by intricate swirling arabesques with floral motifs in gold, white, red, yellow, green, and pink on a lapis lazuli ground with gold accents all bordered in bands of gold, white, blue, red and heavy gold interlace, surmounted by a band of floral vegetal decoration in gold, white, yellow, pink, and red over alternating eight-pointed stars in turquoise and gold on a black ground, itself surmounted by an triangular piece or hasp filled with further swirling arabesques with floral motifs in gold, white, red, pink, yellow, etc. on a gold ground with lapis lazuli accents, all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in lapis lazuli ; written area gold-flecked and surrounded by frame consisting of bands of gold, blue, red, and turquoise, divisions within defined by narrow gold bands outlined by black fillets ; rich floral vegetal accents appear occasionally flanking text ; compositions of silhouette paper in some leaves outlined in gold (in lower margin of fol.13a (p.25), bird motif in paper, elsewhere enhanced by the illuminator in the same bird theme, has been elaborated as a goat instead).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; compact, exquisite hand ; serifless, with slight effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 10 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 2 III(12), II (16), i ; two ternions and a binion ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "الهى بحق آنكه ترا حاجت نست رحمت كن برآنكه او را حجت نست تمت الكتاب"', 'Incipit: "این چند كلمه است از نصايح و اشعار نديم بارگاه حضرت جبارى خواجه عبد الله انصارى عليه الرحمه و المغفره ای ز دردت بيدلانرا بوی در مال آمده ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from opening matter on fol.1b.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Sublime copy of a selection of maxims and verses by Abū Ismāʻīl ʻAbd Allāh ibn Muḥammad al-Anṣārī al-Harawī (d.481/1089), attributed to the celebrated Timurid calligrapher Sulṭān ʻAlī Mashhadī (d.926/1520, see p.248 in Bayānī, Aḥvāl va āsār-i khūshʹnavīsān : nastaʻlīq navīsān, vol.1 and pp.30-32 in Soucek, "The Arts of Calligraphy").'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 474', "Origin: As appears with authorial colophon on p.440, transcription apparently completed in 1144 [1731 or 2]. Authorial colophon indicates that composition was completed 10 Muḥarram 804 [ca. 20 August 1401] in the author's house in Bursa (Brūṣah) where Bāyazīd I had his court.", 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, front flyleaf (p.1) and spine label, "IL 392" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in shell marbled paper (mainly in dark blue and dark brown, which Jake Benson has identified as being of 19th century Spanish manufacture) with green-blue cloth over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in green textile ; sewn in dark pink thread, two stations, many threads broken ; worked endbands in light yellow and beige or dark pink, damaged with significant losses ; overall in somewhat poor condition with much abrasion, staining, some delamination of boards, lifting and losses of paper and cloth, detaching at spine, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 23 mm. apart (vertical), grapes (raisin) under crown watermark with "IF" below (see p.60, 70, etc.), transluscent and sturdy, very well burnished, mainly beige or light yellow in color ; some staining and tide lines, as well as minor foxing.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke) rubricated.', "Script: Naskh ; fine, medium Turkish or 'Syrian' hand ; partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on most ascenders other than free-standing alif, slight effect of tilt to the left, rounded with curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in distinct dots.", 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: VI+I (14), 21 V(224), IV+1 (233), V (243), II (247) ; chiefly quinions ; final two leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Authorial" [mainly], reads "قال المصنف رحمه الله ونفع بعلمه وافق فراغه في يوم الاحد العشر محرم سنة اربع وثمان مائة ... لجميع المسلمين روايته عني عموما واجزت الاولادي محمد واحمد وابو الخير وغيرهم خصوصا روايته عني مع جميع ما يجوز لي وعني روايته قاله وكتبه محمد بن محمد الجزري عفا الله عنهم وذلك بمنزلي من مدينة مروصة المحروسة سنة ١١٤٤ م م م م م م م"', 'Explicit: "واجعله حجة لي يا رب العالمين وهذا اخر ما سهل اختصاره من نشر القرآت جعله الله خالصا لوجه ونفع به"', 'Incipit: "قال شيخنا العلامة ... شمس الملة والدين اسبغ الله تعالى الى يوم الدين محمد بن محمد بن محمد الجزري الشافعي رحم الله اسلافه الكرام واهداه العظام الحمد لله على التقريب والتيسير واشهد ان لا اله الا الله وحده لا شريك له ... وبعد فلما كان كتابي نشر القرآت العشرة مما عرف قدره واشتهر بين الطلبة ذكره ... التمس مني ان اقربه وايسره واقتصر على ما فيه من الخلاف فاختصرته ليقل لفظه ويسهل حفظه ..."', 'Title from heading preceding table of contents (p.3).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the abridgment by Ibn al-Jazarī (d.1429) of his Nashr al-qirā’āt al-‘ashr [Kitāb al-Nashr fī al-qirāʼāt al-ʻashr] on the ten readings of the Qur’ān.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 628', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.157, transcription completed in six days during Rabīʻ II 1229 [1814].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label, "IL 384" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Boards (fairly thin) covered in coated paper (dark and lighter blue, mottled with sponge painted or faux marbled look) with red leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted wove paper ; sewn in light pink or yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in light pink and brown, fairly good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, pest damage, moisture damage, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 29-32 mm. apart (horizontal), crescent with face in shield watermark (see p.50, 51, etc.) ; fairly thick and sturdy though crisp, light cream to white in color, well-burnished ; slight ink burn in final leaves.', 'Decoration: Lacunae have been left for rubrics (text being commented upon) yet unsupplied.', "Script: Naskh ; bold, compact Turkish or 'Syrian' hand ; partially (though irregularly) seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on occasional lām, joined alif, etc., rounded with curvilinear descenders, slight effect of tilt to the left, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf), pointing in strokes or conjoined dots.", 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 7 V(70), IV (18) ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly skips ahead from p.90 to 92, then from p.100 to 102).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "وهذا اخر ما سهل به الرب الكريم نسأله ان يثيبنا ومجينا بجنات النعيم وان ينفع به كل من تلقاه بقلب سليم بجاه خير خلقه عليه افضل الصلاة واتم التسليم ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم تحريرا في ستة ايام مضت من شهر ربيع الثاني سنة ١٢٢٩ والحمد لله رب العالمين امين تم"', 'Explicit: "اقوى اختصاصا اذ قال العلامة العاسمي فانظر اذا لم يتفاوتا في الاختصاص والظاهر انه يجوز جعل كل قرينة او ترشيحا "', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي خص العلماء بمعرفة الدقائق واسلكهم سبل المجازاة وطرق الحقائق ... وبعد فيقول اسير الخطايا والذلات احمد بن يونس الخليفي الشافعي ضاعف الله له الدرجات هذه عبارات شريفة وتحقيقات منيفة اقتطفتها من ثمر المؤلفات وبدائع التحقيقات توضح الخفي بادنى اشارة وتبين المراد باوجز عبارة وسميتها نتائج الفكر وثمر المؤلفات على الشرح الصغير لشيخنا العلامة احمد الملوي على السمرقندية في الاستعارات ...."', 'Title from opening on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Clear copy of the supercommentary by Aḥmad ibn Yūnis al-Khalīfī (d.1794) on the commentary Mukhtaṣar ʻIqd al-durar al-bahīyah fī sharḥ al-Risālah al-Samarqandīyah fī al-istiʻārāt, known as al-Sharḥ al-ṣaghīr, by Aḥmad ibn ʻAbd al-Fattāḥ al-Mullawī (d.1767) upon al-Risālah al-Samarqandīyah, a work on metaphor (istiʻārah) by Abū al-Qāsim ibn Abī Bakr al- Samarqandī (ca. 1483).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 882', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon. Patronage note at close (p.526) may refer to composition of this recension or to execution of the copy, apparently on the order of Navvāb (Shāhzādah Baygum (Begam) Ṣāḥibah bint Pādishāh Jam Jāh Shāh ʻĀlam Bahādur Padishāh Ghāzī (نواب شاهزاده بيگم صاحبه بنت پادشاه جم جاه شاه عالم بهادر پادشاه غازى), i.e daughter of Bahādur Shāh I (Shāh ʻĀlam I), see descriptive note on added leaf (p.7). Paper, hand, etc. could be consistent with a late 17th century dating, though a later dating may be more likely.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) No Husselman or Meredith-Owens notes" (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Slip with note "counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" (paginated pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 31', 'Binding: Boards covered in shell \'marbled\' paper (mainly in blue and burnt orange) with tan leather over spine and board corners (half-binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in seafoam green wove paper, hinges in dark purple textile ; spine stamped with title "KUSEYE ABOO MOSLEM" on piece of dark blue leather ; now sewn in white thread over five recessed cords ; Western-style worked endbands in blue and red threads over a leather core ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian or Persian) laid paper with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly distinct) and rare chain line visible, cloudy formation, quite sturdy though transluscent, well-burnished, dark cream in color ; staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; bold, elegant hand ; serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing (two and three dots) mainly in distinct or conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, IV+1 (9), 13 IV(113), I (115), 5 IV(155), 2 II(163), IV+2 (173), 10 IV(253), III (259), I (261), ii (per mid-quire marks) ; chiefly quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of black strokes in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf and lower-outer corner of the right-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and flyleaves and skips two pages each between pp.7-8 and 513-514).', 'Explicit: "والله اعلم بالصواب تم تمام شد هذا الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب از قصه امیر امیران ... یعنی بنام خوش امیر عبد الرحمن بن اسد بن جنید بن آل عمران تمام شد دفتر سیویم قصه ابو مسلم مروزی بموجب فرمایش بیگمصاحبه محترمه معظمه فیاضه زمان ملكۀ دوران نواب شاهزاده بيگم صاحبه بنت بادشاه جم جاه شاه عالم بهادر پادشاه غازی تم تم تم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمین والعاقبة للمتقین الصواه [الصلوة] والسلام على رسوله محمد واله اجمعین اول بنام آنکه مکیس منیت مشترک ان خالق خلاق و ان مالک ملک ... و حکیم ابو طاهر ترتوسی رحمة الله علیه ..."', 'Title from inscription on p.7.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the epic tale relating the life and personality of Abū Muslim al-Khurāsānī (fl. 8th cent.) in the version attributed to Abū Ṭāhir Tartūsī (Ṭarsūsī, Tūsī, Ṭarṭūsī ; see opening matter on p.10).'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Andrea Galvani of Pordenone. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 35 and no. 860.', 'Contains astronomical tables and diagrams.', 'Text and tables rubricated; marginal corrections in hand of copyist.', 'Date based on scope of tables.', 'For a later (?) copy of this work see Mich. Isl. Ms. 735.', 'Text (not this copy) published.', 'Includes tables for Islamic years 1149 [1736 or 7] to 1224 [1809 or 10], which is the basis for the 18th-cent. date assigned to this item. This copy does not contain the star catalog mentioned by King. Pp. [29-31] are about the seven climes and about world geography relative to the qiblah.', '"Prayer-tables for Cairo taken from the main corpus [compiled by Ibn Yūnus] ... preceded by a short introduction in 8 or 10 faṣls, simple calendrical tables, and a solar longitude table, and followed by a star catalog." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 91.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 595', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely early 20th or possibly late 19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and label on lower cover, "IL 385" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark purple cloth ; Type III ; pastedowns and flyleaves in brown wove paper ; upper and lower covers carry block-stamped and silver-painted medallion within frame of block-stamped geometric interlace ; sewn in white thread over two cords (ridges at spine, possibly not well recessed) ; overall in good condition though spine is partially detached from text block and first couple of quires are loose.', 'Support: European wove paper of at least two types ; pages slightly brittle at edges.', 'Decoration: Chapter and subject headings and dividers, some marginal glosses, overlining, and hemistich markers rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; careful modern hand with some influence of ruqʻah ; partially seriffed with head-serif on initial lām and occasional free-standing alif (slightly wavy), mainly adhering to baseline, pointing mainly in distinct dots, occasionally dot of nūn assimilated with bowl ; hand changes on p.92 to a thicker line with elongation of letters ; incipt, additions and corrections, and some marginal glosses in ruqʻah, different hand from main text.', 'Layout: Written in 21-23 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, VII + I (16), IV (24), V (34), IV (42), VI (54), i ; several pages in final quire left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "اشتق من فاطمة البتول خير النساء بضعة الرسول صلى عليه الله ذو الجلال و اهل بيته اولى الكمال وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى آله وصحبه اجمعين الحمد لله رب العالمين م م م"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين و الصلاة و السلام على سيد الوجودات امام النبيين سيدنا و سيد المخلوقين … اما بعد فيقول العبد الفقير الى الله تعالى محمد ابن المرحوم السيد عمر الحريري الرفاعي شيخ السجادة الرفاعية بحماة المحمية احسن الله له و لوالديه و للمسلمين آمين هذه رسالة مباركة سميتها نتيجة المفاخر في اخبار بني رفاعة السادة الاكابر ..."', 'Title from opening matter (preface) on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of a historical and genealogical work on the Banū Rifāʼah by Muḥammad ibn ʻUmar ibn Ḥasan al-Ḥarīrī al-Rifāʻī (d.1912). Description provided mainly by Sarah Mirza.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Andrea Galvani of Pordenone. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 36 and no. 860.', 'Text rubricated.', 'Date in colophon: wa-kāna al-farāgh min kitābat hādhā al-matn qarīb adhān al-ẓuhr yawm al-khamīs ghurrat Rajab sanat 1299 alf wa-miʾatayn wa-tisʻah wa-tisʻimiʾah min hijrat sayyid al-mursilīn [19 May 1882]....', 'Poem dealing briefly with the following subjects: the determination of religious holidays; the Byzantine and Coptic calendars; the constellations and lunar mansions and their relation to the seasons; the times of prayer; the indications of the qiblah for Egypt.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 499', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.122, composition of Natījat al-naẓar completed in last tenth of Ramaḍān 817 [December 1414]. Transcription of this copy executed by Nāṣir Aṣlān and completed 26 Shawwāl 1086 [ca. 13 January 1676]. As appears in colophon on p.165, ijāzah or thabat composed and granted to ʻAbd al-Qādir ibn Yaḥyá ibn Jumʻah al-Baṣīr al-Baṣrī by Abū al-Falāḥ ʻAbd al-Ḥayy ibn Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad Ibn al-ʻImād in Madrasat al-Salīmīyah and completed in Damascus 8 Rabīʻ I 1077 [ca. 8 September 1666]. This copy of the ijāzah transcribed from that in his hand "ونقل هذا الثبت من خط المجيز ابي الفلاح الشيخ عبد الحي عفي الله عنه بمنه وكرمه امين". The recipient is the granter of the final ijāzah, dated 13 Dhū al-Qaʻdah 1086 [ca. 29 January 1676].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.1-2) -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.3-4) -- c. Two more inventory cataloguing slips in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.5-8) -- d. Portion of a page ripped from a printed book (pp.9-10).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 386" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Boards covered in shell marbled paper (mainly in green-blue, purple, and yellow) with tan leather over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in beige wove paper ; resewn in heavy cream thread, six stations ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of paper, etc.', 'Support: European and non-European laid paper ; mainly European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), three crescents watermark (perpendicular to chains, 80 mm. long, see p.22), crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.18,19,34,35, etc.) and "V G" under trefoil countermark (compare the three marks of no.249 in Nikolaev, Watermarks of the Ottoman Empire, dated 1673), well-burnished and sturdy ; final two quires in non-European laid paper with roughly 9-10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), extremely indistinct in most leaves though obviously curved where visible, thin, crisp, highly burnished to glossy, beige to dark cream in color.', 'Decoration: Keywords and abbreviation symbols (mainly sigla) rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas ; overlining in red.', "Script: Naskh ; three main 'Syrian' (Palestinian [?]) hands ; main work in a compact, elegant hand, virtually serifless (though miniscule serifs appear irregularly and sharp right-ward serif appears on shaqq of kāf) with effect of tilt to the left, descenders mainly curvilinear though occasional rāʼ and bowl / foot of nūn, lām, sīn, ṣāḍ, etc. quite flat and stiff, pointing in distinct dots, kāf mashqūqah preferred ; ijāzah or thabat in another fine hand, partially seriffed and quite freely ligatured with effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline, quite rounded with curvlinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots ; final ijāzah appears to be in still a different hand, serifless with effect of slight tilt to the left, words occasionally descending to baseline, open and closed counters.", 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 7 IV(56), VI (68), V (78), ii ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: [Natījat al-naẓar] "Authorial," rectangular, reads "وكان الفراغ من وضع هذا الشرح في العشر الاخير من رمضان سنة سبع عشرة وثمان مائة بالقاهرة المعزية حرسها الله تعالى" ; "Scribal," triangular, reads "وكان الفراغ من نسخته يوم الاثنين يوم سته وعشرين في شهر شوال سنة الف وستة وثمانين من بعد الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلاة واكمل السلام على يد اقل عباد الله الراجي رحمته ... ناصر اصلان غفر الله له ولوالديه ولاستاذيه ولجميع المسلمين والحمد لله رب العالمين امين اللهم امين م م م م م م م" ; [Thabat / Ijāzah] "Authorial" and "Scribal," reads "قال ذلك بفمه ورقمه بقلمه افقر العباد ... ابو الفلاح عبد الحي بن احمد بن محمد بن العماد [؟] وفقه الله لقول السداد ... فكتب وصحح [؟] ذلك بمدرسة السليمية من صالحية دمشق ... نهار الاربعاء ثامن شهر ربيع الاول سنة سبع وسبعين والف جعلها الله خالصة لوجه امين"', 'Explicit: [Natījat al-naẓar] "يعني ان علماء الحديث صنفوا في غالب الانواع المذكورة في الخاتمة وهي من قبيل النقل المحضر وهذا خاتمة هذا الكتاب والله الموفق والهادي للصواب لا رب سواه ولا معبود الا اياه" ; [Thabat / Ijāzah] "ثم صحب ابن عمه علي ابن ابي طالب رضي الله تعالى عنه واختص به وبصحبته حتى توفى ومات ابن عباس رضي الله عنه في رمضان سنة ثمان وستين وعاش ثلاثا وثمانين سنة', 'Incipit: [Natījat al-naẓar] "الحمد لله الذي شرح حرج الصدور لنخبة الفكر في علوم الخبر وفتح مرتج الامور من مسالك العبر للصحيح النظر ... اما بعد فان الكتاب المسمى نخبة الفكر في مصطلح اهل الاثر من مصنفات الشيخ الامام ... الفضل شهاب الدين ابن حجر ..." ; [Thabat / Ijāzah] "الحمد لله الذي رفع لاهل الحديث ... وكساهم بدعاء نبيهم من النضرة جلبابا ... وبعد فان علم الحديث اشرف العلوم على الاطلاق ... هذا وان اشد من رأيت عنايته بهذا الشأن ... الشيخ عبد القادر ابن يحيى اغا بن جمعة اغا البصري مولدا الاثري الخبري الاصولي الحنبلي مذهبا ومعتقدا ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from 'title page' (p.11).", 'Ms. composite codex.', '4. p.165-p.166 : [Ijāzah granted to Ḥusayn ibn Naẓmīʻzādah by ʻAbd al-Qādir ibn Yaḥyá ibn Jumʻah al-Baṣīr al-Baṣrī] / ʻAbd al-Qādir ibn Yaḥyá ibn Jumʻah al-Baṣīr al-Baṣrī.', '3. p.126-p.165 : [Thabat or ijāzah granted to ʻAbd al-Qādir ibn Yaḥyá ibn Jumʻah al-Baṣīr al-Baṣrī by ʻAbd al-Ḥayy ibn Aḥmad Ibn al-ʻImād] / ʻAbd al-Ḥayy ibn Aḥmad Ibn al-ʻImād.', '2. p.123-p.125 : [blank].', '1. p.12-p.122 : Natījat al-naẓar fī nukhbat al-fikar / Kamāl al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad ibn Ḥasan al-Taymī al-Dārimī.', 'A fine copy of a commentary on a treatise on the technical terms used in the science of ḥadīth by Ibn Ḥajar al-ʻAsqalānī (d.1449), Nukhbat al-fikar fī musṭalaḥ ahl al-athar, summarizing the work of Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ al-Shahrazūrī (d.1245). Followed by a lengthy thabat or ijāzah granted to ʻAbd al-Qādir ibn Yaḥyá ibn Jumʻah al-Baṣīr al-Baṣrī by ʻAbd al-Ḥayy ibn Aḥmad Ibn al-ʻImād, itself followed by an ijāzah granted to Ḥusayn ibn Naẓmīʻzādah by the holder of the previous ijāzah.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Three crescents. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Contains a table.', 'Text rubricated; corrections and marginal calculations in hand of copyist; another hand on p. [7], which may actually be the end of another work.', 'Date in colophon: intahat fī 25 al-Qaʻdah sanat 1236 [24 August 1821].', '[16].', 'Pp. [1-7?]. Bound with (all works by this author): [2] Naẓm lil-risālah allatī allafahā al-Waḥdānī dhū al-barāʻah fī ʻilm al-sāʻāt, pp. [7-8]; [3] Hādhihi risālah mukhtaṣarah fī al-ʻamal bi-al-rubʻ al-mujayyab, pp. [9-11]; [4] Kifāyat al-mubtadī wa-al-ghulām lil-ʻamal fī al-rubʻ al-muqanṭarāt ghayr al-tāmm, pp. [11-14]; [5] Naẓm abhaj al-ṣilāt fī maʻrifat al-awqāt bi-al-sāʻāt, p. [15]; [6] Abhaj al-ṣilāt fī maʻrifat sāʻāt dukhūl wa-ḥiṣaṣ awqāt al-ṣalawāt, p.', 'Treatise on the use of the almucantar quadrant to establishe times of prayer and other religious observances; copy defective?'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 569', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest mid to late 15th century. Damage and tail edge inscription (هدية ابن العماد وجامع الصغير بنظام [؟]) suggest that the codex originally opened with gatherings (now lost) carrying a transcript of Hadīyat Ibn al-ʻImād (cf. GAL II 291 no.3 and S II 402 no.3).', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.1-2) -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From \'title page\' (p.5) and envelope flap label "IL 395a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Fiber boards (upper cover now lost) covered in shell marbled paper (mainly in blue, red, yellow, white) with red leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; no board linings (i.e., interior of boards not lined, hinges and turn-ins only) ; sewn in grey-brown thread, two stations ; endbands have sustained significant losses but grey-brown primaries over red core still visible ; overall in quite poor condition with upper cover entirely lost, spine lining and leather almost gone, some abrasion and staining, etc. ; housed in board wrapper for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of perhaps several types ; opening type with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced roughly 28 mm. apart (horizontal), and scissors watermark (roughly 65 mm. tall, 33 mm. wide, see p.10, 11, etc. and compare Briquet 3685 Firenze etc. 1459-1472 and Piccard no. 122460 Bassano 1449 and no.122488-90/93 Ravenna 1470-71) ; next type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 and 36-38 mm. apart (horizontal) and much smaller scissors watermark (roughly 48 mm. tall, 20-22 mm. wide, see p.22 / 32) ; another type with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 29 and 38 mm. apart (horizontal), and shears watermark (see p.90, 91, etc.) ; all sturdy, fairly transluscent and well-burnished ; some staining.', 'Script: Naskh with elements of nastaʻlīq (talik) ; clear Turkish hand in a bold line ; virtually serifless with effect of tilt to the right, slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, casually pointed in strokes rather than distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah and final yāʼ often mardūdah, hāʼ looking like two inverted commas, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf), freely ligatured.', 'Layout: Written in 9 and 12 lines per page with written area divided to two columns to set off the verses.', 'Collation: IV-1 (7), 6 IV(55), IV-1 (62) ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Explicit: "وما عودي بمنحوت ولما تقدم لي تقوم به الطعان لسبعة عشرة ومائين ست سنين [؟] احد لي هذا السنان ضحى يوم الخميس مدى جمادى الاخيرة حين باخ المعمعان لابيات الكتاب لها حساب لرغبة [؟] اخي فهذا الترجمان"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله مزكي الشمس والقمر والى البرية ذي الاقدار والقدر ..."', "Title from inscription on leaf affixed to 'title page' (p.5).", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Abū Naṣr al-Farāḥī's (d.1242) versification of al-Jamīʻ al-ṣaghīr fī al-furūʻ, the well-known legal treatise by Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥasan al-Shaybānī (d.804). Excerpts from Kashf al-ẓunūn addressing these two works appear on leaf affixed to 'title page' (p.5)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 414', 'Origin: As appears in colophon (accompanied by oval seal impression) at close on p.103, transcription executed by the author Osman Şakir (عثمان المشتهر بالشاكر المدرس بدار السلطنه), müderris (مدرس). Date appears much earlier in the opening matter (see p.15), 1231 [1815 or 16] (represented by a chronogram incorporating the title "دا ... نظم دلارا").', 'Former shelfmark: "12 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on interior of upper cover.', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in dark indigo textile (silk) and edged in red leather (silk faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; possibly two-piece binding (split in spine leather may lie where one flange overlaps the other) ; pastedowns and flyleaves (front flyleaf missing) in a marbled (kumlu or kılçıklı ebru in red) European laid paper (three crescents watermark visible in back flyleaf) ; upper and lower covers carry fine gold-tooled scalloped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition) and pendants, all in red leather onlays, with gold-painted stroke accents and tooled chain or guilloché roll border in a series of s-shaped stamps flanked by gold-painted rules ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn chiefly in yellow thread, two stations (added bifolium in opening gathering sewn in dark brown thread, see p.8) ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and pink, in fair condition with tailband detaching ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion of textile, lifting of onlay in pendant on lower cover, splitting and lifting of leather at fore edge flap joint (meeting lower cover) and spine, etc.', 'Support: European wove paper with watermark "J ROSE 1801 [or 1804?]" visible (see p.2, 4, 22, 24, 52, 58, 70, 80, 88, 102) ; highly burnished with margins silver-flecked and tinted pastel blue, pink, green, yellow, etc.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of w-shaped piece filled with swirling floral vegetal motifs in gold, white, pink, yellow, orange and red on fields of gold and dark blue all set in a well of bands in white (with black scallop pattern) , yellow (with black crosses) and pink (with red lozenges and cross-hatching) and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in red and gold ; appearing at openings of subsequent sections are rectangular pieces with gold cartouches (carrying headings in red, blue-green or white) flanked by similar floral motifs and surrounded by colored bands ; written area (often tinted pale green, pale pink, etc.) surrounded by gold frame, with a second gold band defining the margin ; margins tinted (pastel blue, yellow, pink, green, etc.) and gold-flecked ; textual dividers in the form of gold rosettes with red and light blue accents ; keywords rubricated, chrysographed or in blue-green, orange-red or red-brown ; illuminated tailpiece flanks seal impression of author at close.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand ; partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on ascenders other than alif, effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders (some sweeping), mainly open counters, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in conjoined or distinct dots ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of misṭarah / ruling board evident).', 'Collation: V+I (12), 4 V(52), i ; exclusively quinions, with single bifolium added to opening quinion ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Dedication: As appears in opening matter on p.7, composed for Sultan Mahmud II (r.1223-55/1808-39).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "بخط ناظمه المفتقر الى الله الغافر عثمان المشتهر بالشاكر المدرس بدار السلطنه', 'Explicit: "هر ايشك صوكينه دى انجام كار كنه پایان اسپرى اتمام كار فاعلاتن فاعلاتن فاعلات ازبر ايله ساكه بسدر بو لغات"', 'Incipit: "نام ايزدله قلالم اغاز ايده لم نظم كلامى ممتاز قله لم نام شريفن هران صدق واخلاصله تاورد زبان ... سبب تاليف كتاب بعد ازين عزم خطابم دكله سبب نظم كتابم دكله چونکه شاهنشه دارادربان ... يعنى كم حضرت سلطان محمود بولدى بر اصف والا قدرى ثاقب الفكر جدير صدرى ... دير كه بو شاكر عبد اضعف احسن وجهله يازدم الطف فارسى لفظنى قيلدم تقديم تركيجه ترجمه ياننده نديم فارسى اول اولنجه هر بار تركى معنيسى بولينور نا چار ... اصلنى فرعنى ايله تحصيل اد تاريخله همپا اولدى هربرى نظم دلارا اولدى ..."', 'Title from margin of incipit page (p.2) and opening matter (p.15).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant autograph copy of the versified Persian-Turkish glossary of the müderris Osman Şakir (whose name appears in Īḍāḥ al-maknūn as ʻUthmān Shukrī, d.1818?). Apparently inspired by the popular Tuhfe-yi Vehbî (used for many years in Ottoman schools) of Sünbülzâde Vehbi Mehmet Efendi (d.1809), see opening matter on p.5-15.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 378', "Origin: As appears in statements on opening 'title page' (p.5) and 'title pages' for other works (p.83, p.249, etc.), entire mecmua copied by one Ismāʻīl (İsmail), the qāḍī (kadi) in قرائلق [?]. Colophon on p.237 indicates that transcription of second work was completed 1 Muḥarram 1163 [ca. 11 December 1749], with transcription of other works likely completed around the same time.", 'Former shelfmark: "403 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap), likely two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in orange surface-dyed and gold-flecked European laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped (with gold-painted orange paper recessed onlays) lozenge-shaped central ornament (filled with vegetal composition) with gold-painted accents and tooled border ; sewn in dark pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion, lifting of leather, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; one type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 21 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of grapes (raisin) with crown and cartouche (see p.54, 78, etc.) ; another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 20-24 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of grapes (raisin) with crown and name (see p.86, 88, 94, etc.) and names (p.82, 90, etc.) ; other watermarks seen include "LANGUEDOC" in p.190, 238, etc. ; all sturdy and well-burnished, dark cream to buff colored ; flyleaves in two different European laid papers ; one (orange surface-dyed and gold-flecked) with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 30-31 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of three hats (top hats with feathers), the other with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of lion passant guardant (see p.2-3).', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece at opening of first work on p.6, consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral motifs in white, orange and red on fields of cobalt all bordered in red and white, surmounted by swirling floral vegetal design in gold, white, red and orange on a cobalt ground, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in cobalt and red ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by gold frame defined by black fillets, elswhere written area surrounded by red rule-border ; textual dividers in the form of gold discs ; diagram on p.281 ; keywords, passages and section headings rubricated ; some overlining in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; fine, bold Turkish hand ; serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline, some elongation of horizontal strokes, mainly closed counters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iii, 3 V (30), IV (38), 10 V(138), I (140), iii ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes opening flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تمت هذا [كذا] النسخه اللطيفه في غره محرم لسنه ثلث وستين ومائه والف من هجرت من له العز والمجد والشرف"', "Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on 'title page' (p.5).", 'Ms. codex.', "7. p.256-p.281 : Risale fî'l-akaid / Nuh Efendi [Nūḥ ibn Muṣṭafá al-Rūmī al-Miṣrī].", '6. p.249-p.255 : Ahval-i mevlana Nuh Efendi.', '5. p.238-p.248 : [blank].', "4. p.83-p.237 : Tuhfetü'l-Haremeyni'l-Muhteremeyn / Nabi.", '3. p.72-p.82 : [blank].', "2. p.5-p.71 : Nebzet min Zeyl-i Nâbî an Feth-i Mekketi'l-Mükerreme / Nabi.", '1. p.1-p.4 : [blank apart from brief poetic excerpt and ownership statement].', "Fine copy of a collection (mecmua / majmuʻah) of works on the Prophet and faith, including Nabi's works on the Prophet and the pilgrimage (ḥajj) to Mecca and Medina (a personal account of his travels), a work on articles of faith by Nuh Efendi (d.1569 or 70) and a biographical sketch for the same author."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 388', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.761, transcription completed ("wa-kāna al-farāgh min taḥrīr al-nuskhah al-sharīfah al-mubārakah...") in the first part of Ṣafar 1264 [January 1848]. As appears in preceding authorial colophon (also on p.761), composition completed in Rajab 927 [June-July 1521].', 'Former shelfmark: "583 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Boards covered in a dark maroon leather ; Type II binding (with flap), likely two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in a coated, textured (embossed with swirling vegetal design) paper in red with gold-painted borders ; upper and lower covers carry rectangular panel defined by gold borders (tooled and painted) with central painted ornament evoking a bowl or vase with flowers and leaves as well as cornerpieces in floral sprays, all in gold and green ; edges of text block gilt ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and blue, good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion at board edges, joint of fore edge flap, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (mainly horizontal, fairly indistinct, curved) and no chain lines plainly visible, cloudy formation, inclusions, dark beige to light brown in color, fairly transluscent and crisp though sturdy, highly sized and burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of table of contents (فهرست) on p.4, consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche (carrying the title and author in blue "فهرست نفحات انس لامعى") flanked by swirling vegetal motifs in blended green, yellow and white on a gold ground ; another fine illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of text on p.40, consisting of a vaguely triangular shaped piece built up of vegetal forms in blended shades of dark green with gold cartouche (carrying the title and author in blue "نفحات انس لامعى") and sprays of flowers in pink, lavender, light blue, etc. ; written area surrounded by gold frame (much heavier on incipit and facing page, pp.40-41) defined by black fillets with outermost blue rule, divisions within table of contents and elsewhere (mainly to set off verses) defined by narrow gold bands outlined by black fillets ; section headings, key words, notabilia, some individual letters of words (mainly names) and some abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke overlining keywords) rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of three dots, etc. in red ; overlining in red ; small circular diagram in margin of p.79 in blue, red and black ink, another diagram on p.616 in black and red.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant, compact Turkish hand in a bold line ; partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on many ascenders, slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), curvilinear descenders, many closed counters, pointing mainly in conjoined dots or strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 29 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, V (10), IV (18), 36 V(378), II (382), ii ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (distinct for table of contents and main work) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inner flyleaves and skips two pages between pp.293-294).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "وصلى الله على سيدنا ونبينا محمد خير الانام وعلى آله الكرام واصحابه العظام وعلى ائمة اهل الاسلام ومن تبعهم الى يوم القيام وكان الفراغ من تحرير النسخة الشريفة المباركة سنه اربع وستين ومائتين والف في اوائل شهر صفر الخير في سنه ١٢٦٤"', 'Explicit: "ايرمه يوزك ايزلرندن لامعى كيم بونلرك كرچه كيم اشكال حقدر يكن انسان [؟] ايتديلر تاريخ ترجمه ... تاريخ عام طقوز يوز يكرمى ايدى [يدى] پس رجب آيى ايچنده اولدى تمام"', 'Incipit: "نحن نقص عليك احسن القصص بما اوحينا اليك هذا القرآن وان كنت من فبله لمن الغافلين ... افتتاح نفحات انفاس ارباب انس كه ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of Lâmiî Çelebi's Turkish translation of Jāmī's celebrated collection of Ṣūfī biographies with the addition of more than thirty Anatolian saints and poets. Table of contents at opening (pp.4-37). Contribution to the cataloguing from Hossein Mottaghi."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 389', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, etc. suggest late 16th or early 17th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "314 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark maroon leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; board linings and outer flyleaves in quite glossy, blue surface-dyed paper ; upper and lower covers carry large stamped and gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OA1 1) along with gold-painted accents and tooled border ; sewn in brown thread, four stations ; overall in fair condition (despite loss of flap) with minor abrasion, lifting of leather, etc. ; repair to spine (rebacked) in red leather.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal or vertical, quite indistinct, curving) and no chain lines plainly visible, cloudy formation, thin and fairly transluscent though sturdy, burnished but not glossy, not heavily sized ; inner flyleaves in European laid paper with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal) and watermark of circle with trefoil above and possibly anchor [?] inside.', 'Decoration: Splendid illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.4, consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche (carrying title in black "نصايح الابرار") surrounded by elegant swirling arabesques with floral motifs in gold, lavender, red, pink, white, light blue, etc. on a cobalt and gold ground and bordered in a band of black with white or light blue crosses, surmounted by scalloped triangular piece (hasp) or dome filled with similar floral vegetal design on a cobalt and gold ground, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in cobalt with red accents ; written area gold-flecked and surrounded by gold frame defined by black fillets (with outermost cobalt rule on incipit page) ; keywords and headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh ; exquisite hand ; irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on many ascenders, slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, many open counters, pointing (for two and three dots) in conjoined dots or strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, VII (14), iii ; catchwords present though only occasionally visible (often cut off) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes some flyleaves).', 'Dedication: As appears in opening matter on p.5, dedicated to Sultan Murat III (r.1574-1595).', 'Explicit: "در حال افعال ماضيه وافكار راتيه سنه استغفار ايلدى تمت الرسالة"', 'Incipit: "حمد وسپاس وثناء بى قياس بصانع شهود عالم ومبدع وجود آدم ... اما بعد بو فقير وحقير بو رسالۀ معتبرۀ كتب حكمادن لسان فارسدن اخراج ايلدم ... اسم رساله نصايح الابرار والله الموفق والمستعان وعليه التكلان ..."', 'Title from inscription on fly leaf (p.1), illuminated headpiece at opening (p.4), and opening matter (p.7).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of a collection of maxims and wise sayings from an assortment of philosophers, dedicated to Sultan Murat III (r.1574-1595) and elsewhere attributed to one Abdülkerim b. Mehmet (see manuscripts in Milli Kütüphane-Ankara 06 Mil Yz A 2539/1 and 06 Mil Yz A 1941/5, as well as Zeytinoğlu İlçe Halk Kütüphanesi 43 Ze 321/3 and İstanbul Millet Kütüphanesi 34 Ae Edebiyat 478/2).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1041', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, etc. suggest 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip of paper with notes in hands of Eilts and Jameson [according to R. Dougherty] "Astrological text | various hands with introductions & commentaries [crossed out to read] Prayers. | Date unknown | author unidentified | Brought to RBR on 10-27-70 by Mr. Eilts. | Purchased by Mr. Sulaymān from Librarie Tunisienne in 1967. Letter & invoice in MSS file." and on reverse "Religious text | prayers | Dalāʼil al-Hayrāt [sic] | دلايل الحيرات" (paginated p.1-2).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 190', 'Binding: Boards covered in untinted paper with black cloth over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted wove paper ; stab sewn (resewn) in white thread ; overall in fairly qood condition.', 'Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark (perpendicular to the chains, 95 mm. tall, see pp.10, 28-30, etc.) ; well-sized and burnished, sturdy.', "Decoration: Many keywords and section headings rubricated, others in green, blue or yellow ; some headings bordered in green or red ; textual dividers in the form of yellow discs ; written area surrounded by red rule-border ; tables of the Prophet's names on the diagonal (with instructions for recitation in margin of p.33) ; depictions of the rawḍah and minbar in yellow with red and green accents (p.42 and p.43).", 'Script: Maghribī ; spacious, clear hand with slight inclination to the right ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV (8), 7 V(78), I (80), i ; chiefly quinions ; pagination in blue ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert and flyleaves).', 'Explicit: "وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد خاتم النبيين وامام المرسلين وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم تسليما انتهى انتهى بحمد الله وحسن عونه والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "صلى الله على سيدنا محمد وسلم تسليما قال الشيخ الامام ابو عبد الله محمد بن سليمان الجزولي رحمه الله الحمد لله الذي هدانا للايمان والاسلام والصلاة والسلام على محمد نبيه ... وبعد هذا فالغرض في هذا الكتاب ذكر الصلاة على النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم وفضائلها نذكرها محذوفة الاسانيد ليسهل حفظها على القاري وهي من اهم المهمات لمن يريد القرب من رب الارباب وسميته بكتاب دلائل الخيرات وشوارق الانوار في ذكر الصلاة على النبي المختار ابتغاء لمرضات الله تعالى ومحبة في رسوله الكريم ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.21.', 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.154-p.162 : [al-Ṣalāh al-Mashīshīyah and assorted closing prayers and excerpts].', '3. p.20-p.153 : Dalāʼil al-khayrāt wa-shawāriq al-anwār fī dhikr al-ṣalāh ʻalá al-nabī al-mukhtār / al-Jazūlī.', '2. p.18-p.19 : [incitement / propaganda (taḥrīḍ) for Dalāʼil al-khayrāt and in praise of its author "ولبعض العلماء في التحريض لدلائل الخيرات ومدح مؤلفه رضي الله عنه"].', '1. p.5-p.17 : [opening prayers and excerpts].', 'Fine Maghribī copy of al-Jazūlī’s (d.869/1465) celebrated collection of prayers for the Prophet, description of his tomb, his names, etc. with opening and closing prayers, etc.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 680', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.215, transcription of Netâyicüʼl-fünun completed 24 Jumādá I 1068 [ca. 27 February 1658] ; paper, hands, etc. would suggest that other texts were likely copied around the same time.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and "IL 384a" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in a bright blue leather accompanied by slipcase (in red and green leathers, gold rules and stamped chain borders, lined with bright pink coated paper) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in yellow surface-dyed coated wove paper with gold-painted border ; upper and lower covers carry gold-stamped central lozenge filled with vegetal composition (accented with red paint), along with gold-tooled accents and guilloché roll border ; design continues on envelope flap ; edges of text block gold-painted in floral designs ; sewn in red thread, two stations, broken in some gatherings ; worked chevron endbands in red and cream, good condition ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion and staining, lifting and tears to slipcase leather, slip case flap detached.', 'Support: European laid paper (same for all three works) with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 29 mm. apart (horizontal), crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.4, 6, 12, 13, etc.) and "V []" under trefoil countermark (see p.240, etc.), thick and sturdy, well-burnished, cream in color.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; written area of Netâyicüʼl-fünun surrounded by red rule-border ; some textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) and naskh ; likely three main hands ; nastaʻlīq (talik) hands [Netâyicüʼl-fünun and Maruzat-ı Ebussuud] both virtually serifless with effect of tilt to the left and slight effect of descent to baseline ; final hand with more elongation of horizontal strokes and many sweeping descenders ; naskh [Terkib-i bend] also virtually serifless with slight effect of descent to baseline, curvilinear descenders (some sweeping), and pointing in curves rather than distinct dots ; partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 15 [Netâyicüʼl-fünun] and 23 [Maruzat-ı Ebussuud] lines per page ; for Terkib-i bend of Kara Çelebi-zade, written area divided to two columns to set off poetry, 11-13 lines of verse per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 12 V(120), III (126), i ; quinions followed by a ternion ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "قد وقع الفراغ من تسويد هذه النسخة الشريفة في وقت العشاء من ليلة الاربعاء في ليلة الرابع والعشرين من شهر جمادى الاولى في سنه ثمان وستين والف"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from opening on p.6.', 'Ms. codex.', '9. p.245-p.254 : [blank].', '8. p.244 : [excerpt].', '7. p.230-p.243 : [Maruzat-ı Ebussuud] / Ebussuud Efendi.', '6. p.229 : [blank].', '5. p.228 : [poetic excerpt].', '4. p.226-p.227 : [blank].', '3. p.218-p.225 : [Terkib-i bend der münâcât be-dergâh-ı Kadiʼl-hâcât] / Karaçelebizade Abdülaziz Efendi.', '2. p.216-p.217 : [blank].', "1. p.6-p.215 : Netâyicüʼl-fünun ve mehâsinüʼl-mütun/ Nev'î.", "Fine copy of the encyclopedic survey of the twelve sciences or branches of learning by Nev'î, Yahya b. Pîr Ali b. Nasûh (d.1599), including scope and standard treatises for each, with many excerpts in Arabic and Persian ; followed by a poem of Karaçelebizade Abdülaziz Efendi (d.1657) and Maruzat-ı Ebussuud, a collection of legal decisions (fetvas) issued by Abū al-Suʻūd al-ʻImādī (Ebussuud Efendi, d.1574) and sanctioned by Sultan Süleyman I (r.1520-1566)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 373', "Origin: As appears in colophon on p.247, copied by ʻAbd al-Ghanī ibn Khaḍir [Khiḍr] (Abdulganî bin Hazır [Hızır] / عبد الغنى بن خضر) ; date of transcription not specified, though author's dates, decoration, etc. would suggest mide to late 18th century.", 'Former shelfmark: "410 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf (p.2) ; "٢٧٧" on tail edge of text block.', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in dark brown leather with red leather over spine, fore edge flap and edges/turn-ins (leather framed and edged binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in marbled laid paper (in shades of blue, pink, red, yellow, green, bright orange, etc.) ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, somewhat similar to Déroche class. OAi2 1) and pendants with gold-painted accents and tooled rosettes, as well as guilloché roll border in gold ; sewn in dark pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and pale green, fair condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting of leather, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal or vertical, curved and somewhat indistinct) and no chain lines visible, cloudy formation, crisp and fairly transluscent though sturdy, quite well-burnished, buff in color ; flyleaves in European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (horizontal), and large watermark of scrollwork with crown above.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.8, consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral motifs in gold with red, white, orange and light blue accents, surmounted by scalloped w-shaped piece filled with swirling vegetal decoration with floral motifs in shades of pink, blue, red and white, on fields of gold and dark blue, all set in an elaborate well consting of bands of blue, pink and gold interlace and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and red ; written area throughout surrounded by heavy gold frame defined by black fillets with outermost red rule, divisions within defined by narrow gold bands outlined in black fillets ; keywords, section headings, and excerpts (mainly Qurʼānic with vocalization) rubricated ; occasional overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand ; partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on occasional lām, effect of tilt to the left, closed and open counters, curvilinear descenders, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, I (2), 12 V(122), II (126), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf and skips two pages each between pp.101-102 and 159-160).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "قد وقع الختام عن تنميق هذه النسخة الجليلة المنقولة مصليا على نبيه محمد واله واصحابه الكرام البرره على يد اضعف الفقير عبد الغنى بن خضر غفر الله له وستر عيوبه تمت م"', 'Explicit: "دخى ممنوعلر اولوب حد مقدارلرنجه حركت ايتمليلردر"', 'Incipit: "حمد نامحدود وثناى نامعدود ايكى عالمدن مقصود اول معبود بالحق اولان واجب الوجود در كاهنه اولسونكه دين اسلامى هر حالده عالى ... وبعد بو عبد فقير نا ازاده يعنى محمد سالم ميرزا زاده بى ارتياب هنكام صبا وعالم شبابدن ... وشيرازه بند ختام ايدوب بو مسوده يى نيل الرشاد في امر الجهاد ناميله تسميه ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.15.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the work on jihād by Mehmet Salim Mirzazade (d.1743) ; contents listing at opening of codex (p.6).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 866', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.38a, first work copied by Bābā [?] Valad Āghā Shihāb. Copying finished Jumādá I 1222 [July-August 1807]. Anthology lacks a formal colophon, though a few dates appear (1206 [1791 or 2], 1211 [1796 or 7] p.241), likely also early 19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip in hand of Meredith-Owens marked "MO 11" describing contents and suggested dating reads "MO 11 Niṣāb al-ṣibyān of Abū Naṣr Farāhī. A rhymed Arabic-Persian vocabulary. Followed by a verse anthology and the Dīvān of Mīrzā Muḥammad Ismāʻīl of Shīrāz. Undated but probably XIXth century" b. Slip reading "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Meredith-Owens notes" c. Slip reading "counted for 1968/69 Annual Report"', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 15', 'Binding: Pasteboards (quite spongy) covered in brown (with orange tones) leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in black leather ; white and pink threads ; two sewing stations ; endbands in yellow with a chevron pattern ; in poor condition, with much wear, repair on spine ; lower cover has fully detached at spine ; extensive page repairs at beginning of ms. unfortunately obscure text in many places and make transcription of incipit difficult ; quite soiled with dirt, wax, food, and other stains ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types with watermarks including scrollwork with initials below (p.22, etc.), three hats (top hats) with feathers (p.50, 52, etc.), three hats (tre cappelli, p.198, 284, etc.), and lion passant guardant (p.436, 438, etc.) ; front and back flyleaves (each an inserted single bifolium) in still other European laid paper with no watermarks visible.', 'Decoration: Textual dividers in the form of red circles (similar to numeral ٥) appear in first work at the end of each line ; first work rubricated with section headings, textual dividers, etc. in red ; anthology partially rubricated with titles, section headings, dedications, etc. in red.', 'Script: Supplied in two main hands ; first work in Naskh ; large, neatly executed, Persianate or Indian hand ; virtually serifless though occasional left-sloping barbed head-serif on alif of lām alif ligature and occasional final lām ; occasional right-sloping barbed head-serif on bar of kāf mashkūlah ; many closed counters ; line thickness changes though hand appears not to (though opening and a few leaves at the center have slightly different character) ; essentially fully pointed, often with two dots often positioned one above the other rather than beside ; many mistakes in the pointing ; partially vocalized ; often final letters or entire final word of each line is superscript ; anthology is supplied in several hands of a kind of shikāstah nastaʻlīq script ; serifless ; interesting hāʼ mudghamah looking like two inverted commas one atop the other ; sweeping descenders ; free use of ligatures ; words sloping to baseline ; final letters or final word of each line often superscript ; line thickness, size, and hand all change frequently.', 'Layout: First work written in 9 lines per page ; anthology ruled in two columns with number of lines per page varying widely from 4 to 12 ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board quite evident).', 'Collation: ii, V(10), V+2(22), V(32), III(38), IV+1(47), 2 IV(63), 2 I(67), 2 IV(91), IV+2 (101), IV-1(108), IV(116), I(118), I+1(121), IV(129), IV-1(136), 3 IV(160), I(162), IV+1(171), IV(179), I(181), IV(189), VI(201), IV(209), 5 (214), III+2(222), II(226), ii ; catchwords present in first work, but appear irregularly in anthology ; several folia in anthology are left blank or partially blank, indicating division of contents and not missing text ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during cataloguing).', 'Colophon: [Niṣāb al-ṣibyān] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمام كتاب نصاب بتاريخ شهر جمادى اول بخط حقير فقير اغا بابا [؟] ولد اغا شهاب سنة ١٢٢٢"', 'Explicit: [Niṣāb al-ṣibyān] "ناس و انس و اناس ادمیان پدر مادر ادم و حوا"', 'Incipit: [Niṣāb al-ṣibyān] "الحمد لله رب العالمين [والصلاة] والسلام على خير خلقه محمد ... اما بعد حنين گويد ... ابو نصر فراهي حسد حافده وحفد حاسده ما حركت الشمال لنخل الدقيق ... صبيانرا پيش از تعلم لغت عرب رغبت مى افتد باشعار فارسي ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '3. fol.40b-226b : [Collected works of poetry].', '2. fol.39a-40a : [blank].', '1. fol.1a-38b : Niṣāb al-ṣibyān / Abū Naṣr Farāhī.', "Abū Naṣr al-Farāhī's versified Arabic-Persian vocabulary followed by a collection (majmūʻah) of poetry in Persian, beginning with rubāʻīyāt and including works attributed to Mīrzā Muḥammad Ismāʻīl and Rashīd al-Dīn Vaṭvāṭ, somewhat haphazardly copied toward the end."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 67', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.746, copied for himself by Muḥammad ibn al-Shujāʻī Shāhīn al-Bishlāqī [al-Bashlāqī ?] al-Ḥanafī. Transcription completed ("ʻallaqahu li-nafsih ... wa-kāna al-farāgh min taʻlīqih ...") 8 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 873 [ca. 19 June 1469] in Damascus.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 52. Decisions of Bukhari."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, now lost) ; doublures and doublure hinges in dark brown leather, block-pressed with intricate vegetal design ; upper and lower covers carry blind-tooled medallion accented with gold dots, filled with geometric strapwork design having three elongated intersecting dodecagons and a six pointed star, and surrounded by interlace band and a series of small lobes with strokes at the spandrels (perhaps most comparable to Weisweiler type 49) ; a fine border of stamped interlace accented by gold dots and framed by tooled fillets, along with corner pieces complete the design ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; fine chevron endbands in red and cream, fair condition ; in fair condition with much abrasion, staining, cracking and lifting of leather, delamination of boards, shrinkage, etc.', 'Support: non-European (Arab) laid paper of perhaps two types, one with chain lines (vertical) grouped in threes with roughly 32-38 mm. between the groups and 8-10 mm. between the chains (see p.2, 6, etc.) and laid lines (horizontal) spaced roughly 8 laid lines per cm., the other likewise with chain lines grouped in threes with roughly 39-43 between groups and 10-12 between chains (see p.746, 747, etc.) and 7-8 laid lines per cm. ; burnished and quite thick and heavy ; significant moisture damage and staining, even obscuring text in latter quires ; flyleaves in European paper with crown-star-crescent watermark (compare Heawood 1132).', 'Decoration: Section headings and some notabilia (side-heads) rubricated ; overlining and textual dividers in the form of inverted commas (alone and in threes forming triangles) in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Syrian hand ; virtually serifless ; slight effect of tilt to the left ; many closed counters ; freely ligatured ; inverted caret as an ihmāl sign to distinguish sīn ; three dots in the form of an vertically elongated inverted comma ; bar of kāf (shaqq) very often disconnected.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', "Collation: ii, IV+1 (9), 5 V(59), IV+1 (68), 2 V(88), V-1 (97), 10 V(197), IV (205), 4 V(245), III+1 (252), 2 V(272), V-1 (281), 9 V(371), II+1 (376), ii ; chiefly quinions ; final three leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (begins with ١ on 'title page'/fol.2a/p.3) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "علقه لنفسه العبد الفقير الى الله تعالى محمد ابن الشجاعي شاهين البشلاقي الحنفي بدمشق المحروسة زادها الله شرفا وصانها من جميع الافات بمحمد واله وكان الفراغ من تعليقه نهار الاحد ثامن شهر ذي الحجة من شهور سنة ثلاث وسبعين وثمان مائة والحمد لله وحده وصلى الله على سيدنا [؟] محمد واله وصحبه وسلم تسليما ابدا ورضي الله عن اصحاب رسول الله اجمعين"', 'Explicit: "القرض في كل عددي متقارب وفي كل كيلي ووزني ولا يجوز قرض الحيوان والعقار والخشب وما كان متفاوتا الكل في الاصل والله اعلم. اخر الجزء الاول من الخلاصة الفتاوى ويتلوه الجزء الثاني الاخير [؟] والثاني كتاب الاجازات ان شاء الله تعالى"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله خالق الارواح والاجسام وجاعل النور والظلام ... وقال الامام الزاهد ... افتخار الملة والدين ... طاهر بن احمد بن عبد الرشيد البخاري نور الله تربته ... وقد كتبت كتب في هذا الفن احدهما تسمى بخزانة الواقعات والثانية تسمى كتاب النصاب فسألني بعد ذلك بعض اخواني ان اكتب نسخة قصيرة يمكن ضبظها وتيسير حفظها فكتبت هذه النسخة ... وسميتها كتاب الخلاصة ..."', 'Title from inscription accompanying table of contents on fol.1a (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', 'First volume of the collection of Ḥanafī fatwas by Ṭāhir ibn ʻAbd al-Rashīd al-Bukhārī.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 17', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.444a (p.909) copied by ʻAlī bin ʻAlī al-Kutubī. Date of transcription not specified. Paper may suggest early to mid 18th century. Compare D-Dl Mus.3154-D-1 and D-Dl Mus.3154-D-5, autographs of Antonio Duni dated 1744 and 1746 (cf Répertoire International of the Sources Musicales = RISM and CatChiesa 1765) and consider A 3 marks in Velkov and Andreev, Filigranes dans les documents ottomans. I Trois croissants (p.62).', 'Accompanying materials: Several slips and scraps with excerpts, glosses, pen trials, etc. numbered by paginator (pp.39-40, pp.125-126, pp.391-392, pp.545-546, pp.663-664, pp.679-680, pp.715-716, pp.771-772, pp.819-820).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 51. Sahih of Bukhari, vol.i."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in tan brown leather (goat) ; Type II binding (with flap) though more of a wrapper ; doublures, flap lining, and spine lining in a fine illuminated block-stamped pattern, grid of squares with small rosette and vegetal designs in alternating squares ; upper and lower covers bear blind-stamped, scalloped mandorla with vegetal decoration (compare Déroche class. OAi 4) and pendants, blind-stamped scalloped lozenges with vegetal decoration (compare Déroche class. OSd 5) as corner pieces accompanied by pendant accents, and gold-painted roll border consisting of a series of s-shaped stamps ; composed of loose quires, not affixed to one another or to cover (wrapper), each quire individually sewn in yellow, rose or red thread, four stations ; in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of three crescents / tre lune (perpendicular to chains, 78 mm long, see p.1, 12, 134, etc) with countermark "A F 3" (or "A F Z") under trefoil with F slightly raised (see p.6, 8, 136, etc) ; fairly thick and well-burninshed ; first leaf fully detached.', 'Decoration: Fine illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) on fol.1b (p.1) consisting of rectangular piece surmounted by semi-circular piece (dome) ; rectangular piece carries empty gold cartouche flanked by floral vegetal accents in gold, red, and green on fields of blue ; semi-circular piece is filled with floral vegetal pattern in gold, white, light blue, pink, yellow and red on fields of blue and green, bordered in gold, green, and red and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue with red accents ; entire headpiece is set in a well of interlace in black and white ; written area of incipit and facing page bordered in frame consisting of alternating gold bands and red, green, and gold fillets ; elsewhere throughout written area is surrounded by rule-border consisting of red and blue fillets ; occasional textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas ; text rubricated with keywords ("حدثنا", "باب", etc.), section headings, overlining, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Egyptian or Ḥijāzī hand [?] hand ; virtually serifless with effect of slight tilt to the left, pointing in distinct dots quiteliberally spaced, hamzah at midline or seated at baseline rather than seated on alif, elongation of horizontal strokes, descenders somewhat flattened, extensively vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 44 V (440), III (446) ; chiefly quinions ; final two leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and skips from p.175 to 178 and from 303 to 306).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "اخر النصف الاول من كتاب الجامع الصحيح تصيف ابي عبد الله محمد بن اسماعيل البخاري ويتلوه اول النصف الثاني مناقب عبد الله ابن مسعود على يد افقر العباد الى عفو ربه الفقير علي بن المرحوم علي الكتبي عفي عنهما بمنه وكرمه وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل وصلى الله على محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين تم"', 'Explicit: "مناقب سالم مولى ابي حذيفة حدثنا سليمان بن حرب ... استقرئوا القرآن من اربعة من عبد الله بن مسعود فبدأ به وسالم مولى ابي حذيفة وابي بن كعب ومعاذ بن جبل قال ولا ادري بدأ بابي اوبمعاذ"', 'Incipit: "باب كيف كان يبدو الوحي الى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم ..."', 'Title from colophon on fol.444a (p.909).', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine, large-format copy of the first half of the Ṣaḥīḥ, al-Bukhārī's celebrated collection of traditions."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 5 v.1', 'Origin: Lacks a colophon. Paper would indicate roughly late 17th century for repairs and binding.', 'Accompanying materials: Scrap of paper inserted between fol.85-86 with the same two lines copied twice.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 48. Zamakhshari\'s commentary on the Kuran I - XXV." ; "٢۰۰٦" on tail edge of textblock (along with edge title).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (in turquoise, crimson, and olive bistre) with spine in dark brown leather (effect of quarter binding) ; Type III (without flap) ; pastedowns in marbled paper (combed, in salmon rose, bright yellow, yellow green, pink tint, and gray blue) ; in fair condition but damaged with spine detaching in several places and spine linen visible where leather has been stripped; abrasion along edges, exposing pasteboards; and wear to marbled paper at corners.', 'Support: non-European paper ; with thick, sagging laid lines spaced approximately 6-7 laid lines per cm. ; unclear chain lines, possibly in groups of two or four. (see fol. 266 / p. 532, group of two spaced roughly 15 mm.) ; thick and smooth ; flyleaves and repairs in European paper, with evenly spaced vertical chain lines spaced rough 30 mm., thin ; paschal lamb watermark in flyleaf (enclosed in a four-lobed circle, approx. 40 x 50 mm. ; most similar to Piccard inv. J 340/no. 86802 / Venice, 1662).', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with sūrah headings, words such as "قلت" and "فان قلت", etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; single hand for the majority of the text with a single hand supplying the text of the repaired portions ; main hand is partially seriffed with left-sloped head-serifs, mainly employing al-lām alif al-muḥaqqaqah but occasionally al-lām alif al-mukhaffafah, and mostly closed counters but quite inconsistent ; hand supplied repaired portions is sans serif, employing al-lām alif al-mukhaffafah nearly exclusively, with the two lines occasionally parallel, closed counters, and a free-standing nūn nearly forming a complete circle ; both hands are fully pointed with occasional vocalization in the same pen and ink.', 'Layout: Written in 33 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 14 IV (112), IV+1 (121), 22 V (341), 1 (342), ii ; chiefly quaternions and quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during cataloguing).', 'Explicit: "وهذا كقوله وما انت عليهم بجبار لست عليهم بمصيطر ويروى ان الرجل منهم كان يعبد الحجر فاذا رأى احسن منه رمى به وأخذ اخر ومنه الحرث بن قيس السهمي"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي انزل القران كلاما مؤلفا منظما ونزله بحسب المصالح منجما وجعله بالتحميد مفتتحا وبالاستعانة مختتما واوحاه على قسمين متشابها ومحكما وفصله سورا وسوره ايات..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from inscriptions on opening folia and tail of textblock.', 'Ms. codex.', "An odd first volume of al-Zamakhsharī's celebrated commentary on the Qurʼān treating Sūrat al-Fātiḥah (1) through verse 43 of Sūrat al-Furqān (25) [see Isl. Ms. 5 v.2 for a second odd volume treating Sūrahs 7-32 ]. Description provided by Alison Vacca."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 460', 'Origin: As appears in colophon (fol.193b), copying finished on the 8th of Ramaḍān 991 [ca. 25 September 1583].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover "IL 52" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced with dark brown leather and now edged in deep purple leather (leather faced and edged framed binding, edging may represent a repair or other intervention); Type III binding (without flap); pastedowns and flyleaves in bright, hot pink surface-dyed, coated wove paper; upper and lower covers each bear blind-stamped central mandorla with detached pendants and tooled and gold-painted border accents; now sewn in golden yellow colored thread, two stations; worked chevron endbands in golden yellow and purple; likely not original to codex (taller and slightly wider); overall in fair condition with minor abrasion and lifting of leather.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper, perhaps of more than one type, mainly with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat indistinct) and chain lines grouped in threes with 12-14 mm. between chains and 38-40 between groups (see p.360, 372, etc.), somewhat cloudy formation, quite sturdy, burnished; several leaves of European laid paper with anchor in circle watermark (p.60, 62, 222, 304, etc.); some leaves tinted beige or pale salmon.', 'Decoration: Simple filled gold headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) and gold rule-border on incipit page; text rubricated with text of Qurʼān in red and tafsīr in black.', 'Script: Naskh; small, compact Syrian or Egyptian hand (variation in line thickness especially in final folia, though appears to be same hand with different pens); virtually serifless with very slight effect of words descending to baseline, straight asecenders, curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in distinct dots (though curved stroke often used for three dots), alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ, kāf mashqūqah preferred; partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page.', 'Collation: ii, II+1 (5), 18 V (185), I (187), III (193), ii; chiefly quinions; catchwords present, rubricated if following text is rubricated; pagination added later in pencil, Western numerals.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم الكتاب المبارك بحمد الله وعونه وحسن توفيقه وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم تسليما كثيرا وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل بتاريخ نهار الاحد المبارك ثامن شهر رمضان المعظم من شهور سنة احد وتسعين وتسعمائة"', 'Explicit: "الضالين وهم النصارى ونكتة البدل افادة ان المهتدين ليسوا يهودا ولا نصارى والله اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب تم"', 'Incipit: "سورة الكهف مكية الاواصر [...؟] الاية مائة وعشر ايات وخمس عشرة اية بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الحمد هو الوصف بالجميل ثابت..."', 'Title from inscription on recto of front flyleaf.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Second half of Tafsīr al-Jalālayn, the well-known commentary on the Qur’an, beginning with Sūrat al-Kahf (18).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 345', 'Origin: As appears in colophon (fol.21a), copied (and possibly also composed) by royal scribe (kātib al-sulṭānī) Muḥammad Ḥusayn al-Ṭihrānī with transcription completed Muḥarram 1268 [October-November 1851].', 'Former shelfmark: "391 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Boards covered in orange-red leather with gray-brown leather over spine and edges / turn-ins (turned-out doublures, framed binding, compare Isl. Ms. 302) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in same gray-brown leather ; upper and lower covers carry border and central ornament faintly stained in the leather ; sewn in spring green thread, six stations ; overall in fairly good condition with some staining, minor abrasion etc.', 'Support: European wove paper ; highly burnished.', 'Decoration: Some keywords rubricated, many others in blue, turquoise, etc. ; some vocalization rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; written area surrounded by heavy frame in gold with red and blue fillets, margins bordered in much narrower bands of red and gold ; text of incipit and facing page set of by gold (now gone to dark green) cloud-bands ; in some places written area flecked with gold (now green).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; large, elegant hand ; serifless, with slight effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, elongation and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes ; partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 7 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV (8), III (14), III+1 (21), i ; quaternion and two ternions.', 'Dedication: Dedicated to Nāṣir al-Dīn Shāh Qājār (see fol.20a).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "كاتب السلطانى محمد حسين الطهرانى مسوده نموده فى شهر محرم الحرام سنه ١٢۶۸"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمین والصلوة والسلام على خیر خلقه محمد وآله اجمعین اما بعد حکیمی سپر انرا پند همیداد ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of a work of advice literature of uncertain authorship.'])

en: (count: ['Text and title rubricated; marginal corrections and notes in hand of copyist and others(?).', "End date from owner's marks on p. [1].", "For al-Mizzī's work, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 796,9.", 'Pp. [1-48]. Bound with: [2] Abū Zayd ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Muḥammad al-Tājūrī, ʻUmdat al-ḥudhdhāq fī al-ʻamal bi-hā fī sāʾir al-āfāq, pp. [48-54]; [3] Miscellaneous unidentified material, pp. [54-60].', '"A treatise on the bridged quadrant based on the work of Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad, al-Mizzī, and Jamāl al-Dīn ʻAbd Allāh, al-Māridīnī." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Origin: Date of transcription is not specified. Paper suggests mid to late 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 398" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 618', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western binding ; board linings and flyleaves in a green wove paper ; spine gold-stamped with title and author ; spine ridges (four) gold-stamped with pattern of dashes, flanked by gold bands ; original sewing difficult to discern, at some point sewn in white thread, but later oversewn ; endbands entirely lacking (may be holes where primaries were stitched) ; in fair condition, with some abrasion to cover ; text block is in poor shape with much pest damage, accretions, and many poor repairs utilizing adhesives that resulted in some blocking ; some scraps with writing used in repairs.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types, primarily with roughly 9 laid lines per cm (mainly vertical but occasionally horizontal), chain lines running horizontally 28-29 mm. apart (mainly horizontal but occasionally vertical), and several different watermarks only barely visible in the gutter, among them what appears to be an eagle in circle (p.54, 394 etc.) and six mounts (p.48, 72, 390 etc.) cf. Velkov Aigle no.1/1A dated 1657, as well as what may be a Paschal lamb (see p.270, 282, 300, 320, 354, etc.) ; lightly burnished ; fairly thick ; some undissolved fibers and inclusions.', 'Decoration: Textual dividers in the form of red discs appear occasionally ; text rubricated with key words, section headings, overlining, some vocalization, etc. in red.', 'Script: Maghribī ; one main hand ; serifed with notable right-sloping head serif on free standing alif, etc. ; characteristic alif of prolongation, curved shafts, etc. ; occasional characteristic Maghribī vocalization in contrasting color (black or red).', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled with impression of ruling board clearly evident.', 'Collation: i, V+1 (11), 19 V (201), I+1 (204), i ; chiefly quinions ; a few unmarked gaps in the text (see p.28, 32, 336) where headings, etc. may have been left unfilled ; catchwords present, though occasionally obscured by pest damage or repairs ; pagination in pencil Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal [?]", rectangular, reads: "كمل الكتاب بحمد الله وحسن عونه وصلى الله على سيدنا ومولانا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم تسليما والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Explicit: "يعز على من رام الا على ... ومفيدا محررا من الناس ويسمح به احد قلبي ... الحمد ثم صلاته وتسليمه الوافي على خاتم الرسل كمل الكتاب ... "', 'Incipit: "قال الشيخ الامام العالم العلامة خاتمة الحفاظ والمحققين جلال الدين عبد الرحمن السيوطي الشافعي ... اما بعد حمدا لله على نعمه الكافية والصلاة والسلام على سيدنا محمد ... فهذه نكت حررتها على كتب في علم العربية عم النفع بها وكثر تداولها وهي الخلاصة لابن مالك والمشهورة بالالفية والكافية لابن الحاجب والشافية له وشذور الذهب لابن هاشم ونزهة الطرف في علم الصرف له اذكر ما يرد على العبارات مع جوابه ان كان ... واتبع فيه ترتيب الالفية في المسائل [؟] والابواب ... الكلام وما يتالف منه"', 'Title from inscription on fol.1a (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine Maghribī copy of the well-known grammatical work.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1013', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, etc. would suggest late 19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: "a. Slip of paper with notes in Jameson’s handwriting: \'Sections from the Koran / Collection of prayers / Sulaymān purchase / 10-20-70\' -- b. Slip of paper with notes in Jameson’s handwriting: \'?Section of the Koran? / Bought on Mr. Sulaymān’s trip. All on one order no. / Brought to RBR on 10-27-70 by Mr. Eilts. Purchased by Mr. Sulaymān from Librarie Tunisienne in 1967. Letter & invoice in MSS file\' " - from handlist prepared by R. Dougherty, 1993, no longer in volume.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 162', 'Binding: Boards covered in red cloth ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted wove paper ; spine gold-stamped with \'title\' ("قرآن كريم") and decorative bands ; now sewn in white thread (rarely visible, see p.44) ; stuck-on endbands in mint green ; overall in quite good condition ; certainly not original (impression of a flap visible in many leaves).', 'Support: Light brown machine wove paper with embossed mark ("imitation watermark") "BATH" under crown (see p.49-50, 53-54, 57-58, and 59-60, 267-268, etc.) ; pigment burn to breakthrough at inner border of frame surrounding written area in many leaves and minor pest damage.', 'Decoration: Fine illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of empty rectangular piece bordered in salmon (orange) and gold, surmounted a scalloped dome carrying title for opening section "دلائل الخيرات مقدمۀ" surrounded by floral vegetal decoration in gold, lavender, green, salmon, and blue, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in light blue ; written area surrounded by gold frame consisting of heavy gold band defined by black fillets with outermost red rule ; textual dividers in the form of illuminated roundels / rosettes with red and blue accents ; simple illuminated headpieces appear at other section headings throughout text.', 'Script: Naskh ; exquisite, bold Ottoman hand ; partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs mainly on lām (initial, final and isolated) and other ascenders apart from alif, slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, mainly open counters, pointing in conjoined dots ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 9 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: Too tightly bound to discern gatherings ; pp.26-29 left blank, likely intended for a depiction of the rawḍah and minbar or Mecca and Medina but never executed ; catchwords present (partially lost to trimming) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد خاتم النبيين وامام المرسلين وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم تسليما والحمد لله رب العالمين وهو حسبنا ونعم الوكيل تمت الدلائل"', 'Incipit: "صلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم الحمد لله الذى هدانا للايمان والاسلام والصلوة على محمد نبيه ... وبعد هذا فالغرض فى هذا الكتاب ذكر الصلوة على النبى صلى الله عليه وسلم وفضائلها نذكرها محذوفة الاسانيد ليسهل حفظها على القارئ وهي من اهم المهمات لمن يريد القرب من رب الارباب وسميته بكتاب دلائل الخيرات وشوارق الانوار في ذكر الصلوة على النبى المختار ابتغاء لمرضات الله تعالى ومحبة فى رسوله الكريم ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.3.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of al-Jazūlī’s (d.869/1465) celebrated collection of prayers for the Prophet, description of his tomb, his names, etc. followed by closing prayers (دعاء ختم سهليه and صلوات الصفا).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 636', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.313, copied by ʻUmar ibn Ismāʻīl with transcription completed 9 Rajab 1035 [ca. 6 April 1626].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and label on fore edge flap "IL 402" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in light brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; spine lining in red and white striped textile ; upper and lower covers carry scalloped blind-stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, similar to Déroche class. OAi 2) as well as tooled border in a series of rules ; sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and cream, good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with much abrasion, staining, minor lifting of leather, upper and lower covers detaching at spine, etc. ; repairs in dark brown to black leather ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (horizontal), anchor in circle watermark (see p.104, etc.) and countermark with "C B" [?] under trefoil (see p.106, etc.) ; sturdy, medium cream in color, burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords, excerpts of qaṣīdah being commented upon and some abbreviation symbols rubricated ; written area surrounded by red and black triple rule-border.', "Script: Naskh ; elegant 'Syrian' or Turkish hand ; mainly serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), quite rounded with curvilinear descenders (some rightward descenders majmūʻah), pointing mainly in distinct dots, kāf mashqqūah preferred (even final kāf), final yāʼ often unpointed.", 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 15 V(150), IV (158) ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly skips two pages between pp.9-10).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "ووافق الفراغ من تعليقه بكرة نهار الاثنين تاسع شهر رجب الفرد سنة خمسة وثلاثين والف على يد الفقير الراجي عفو ربه القدير عمر بن اسماعيل غفر الله له ولوالديه ولجميع المسلمين امين يا رب العالمين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين والحمد لله رب العالمين ان تجد عيبا فسد الخللا جل من لا فيه عيب ولا علا"', 'Explicit: "فرض امر الصلاة والسلام على النبي المكرم صلى الله عليه وسلم توسلا الى الله العظيم الاعظم ... دعواهم فيها سبحانك اللهم وتحيتهم فيها سلام واخر دعواهم ان الحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "رب اشرح لي صدر ويسر لي امري ... الحمد لله هادي من يشاء الى سبيله ومغني من اختاره لمعرفته بنور يقينه عن اقامة برهانه ودليله ... اما بعد فان السلوك فرض عين بلا خلاف على الذكور والاناث والعبيد والاشراف ... وكتب السلوك كثيرة لا تكاد تحصر لكن من اجلها وانفعها واجمعها واخصرها كتاب سلك العين لاذهاب الغين تسمية المصطفى عليه الصلاة والسلام تأليف الشيخ العارف الرباني سيدي عبد القادر بن حبيب الصفدي من بلاد الشام ..."', 'Title from inscription on upper board lining.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the commentary by ʻAlī ibn ʻAṭīyah ibn Ḥasan, ʻAlwān al-Ḥamawī (d.1530) on the Ṣūfī qaṣīdah in tāʼ by ‘Abd al-Qādir ibn Muḥammad ibn ʻUmar ibn Ḥabīb al-Ṣafadī (d. 1509) entitled Silk al-ʻayn li-idhhāb al-ghayn.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 524', 'Origin: At close on p.67, the author has indicated that the composition was completed in eight days with the date of completion expressed in fractions, the fifth of the fifth of the tenth of the fourth tenth of the twelfth ("خامس خامس عاشر العشر الرابع من الثاني عشر") which may be interpreted as Jumādá I 1135 [February-March 1723] but seems inconsistent with the information in the opening matter where the author indicates he travelled to Istanbul in 1140 [1727 or 8]. This copy possibly fairly contemporary or mid-18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and lower cover, "IL 401" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Heavy wove paper cover in pale mint green (single sheet, limp binding without boards) ; sewing in yellow thread, two stations, now damaged with most threads broken or lost ; cover ill-fitting and in poor condition with significant staining, abrasion, tears, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27 mm. apart (horizontal), crown-star-crescent watermark (90 mm. tall, parallel to chains, see p.52, 57, etc.), three crescents watermark (100 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.66, 67, etc.) and "V d" under trefoil countermark (see p.55) ; cloudy formation, sturdy and thick, cream in color, well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Keywords and text being commented upon rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of hāʼ or disc in red ; some overlining in red ; diagrams in margins (p.19, 23, etc.).', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Syrian / Turkish hand ; partially (though irregularly) seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on occasional free-standing alif, lām, etc., curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, freely ligatured, and kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred ; partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 3 V(30), I (32) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Authorial" and "Scribal" [?], reads "وكان تأليفها في ثمانية ايام وطويت عنها خيام الختام في خامس خامس عاشر العشر الرابع من الثاني عشر والحمد لله والله اكبر"', 'Explicit: "وكان يقول من قالها في مرضه ثم مات لم تطعمه النار انتهى والى الله المرجع والمنتهى وهذا اخر ما خطه القلم على طبق ما جري به القلم ... مع قصوري في هذه المادة وعجزي عن سلوك هذه الجادة ... والحمد لله وحده والصلاة والسلام على اشرف الانام ... ما ان اوان وترادف الملوان"', 'Incipit: "حمدا لمن وفقنا بتوفيق عنايته الى الايمان وهدانا بهدايته الى الايقان والاذعان ... وبعد فيقول اسير ذنبه ... محمد بن سليمان الحلبي الريحاوي ... ان مما يقين [؟] على كل مكلف ان يعتقد ان كمالات نبينا صلى الله عليه وسلم لا تحصى ... ثم لما رمتني الديار الحلبية الى القاهرة المصرية ثم الى الديار الرومية الى مدينة قسطنطنية المحروسة المحمية سنة الف واربعين ومائة رأيت بعض ذوي الطاعات يتداولون تأليف الصلوات على سيد السادات ... المنسوب الى قطب الاقطاب ... سيدي محيي الدين محمد بن علي العربي ... وكنت اخذته من جماعة من العلماء الاعلام منهم الاستاذ الشيخ محمد المنفلوطي المالكي ثم عن علامة زمانه وفريد اوانه الشيخ محمد الدمياطي الشهير بابن الميت فاجازني به وبجميع مؤلفات الشيخ بسندها الى الشيخ قدس سره ثم عمن لم يسمح الزمان بمثله ... المرحوم سيدي محمد المغربي الملقب بالصغير ... ثم عن العلامة الشيخ احمد المغربي المالكي وقرأته عليه بعد ان قرأ علي بعضا من فقه الحنفية فاجزته واجازني بذلك وغيره وقد سألني الان بعض الاخوان ان اشرح الصلوات المذكورة بكلمات تحل الالفاظ ... ثم حين وفقت لاتمامها وبدت شمس ختامها ... هدئت لتسميتها بالنورانية على الصلوات على خير البرية ..."', 'Title from opening matter (pp.9-10).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Possible autograph copy of a commentary by Muḥammad ibn Sulaymān al-Ḥalabī al-Rīḥāwī [al-Rayḥāwī] on a prayer for the Prophet (begins "اللهم أفض صلة صلواتك على أول التعينات المفاضة من العماء الرباني ...") attributed to Muḥyī al-Dīn Ibn ʻArabī (d.1240). According to the contents listing on the \'title page\' (p.5), once included in a codex that contained two other works.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 65', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests 17th century. Dated ownership statement on 'title page' (p.7) provides a terminus ante quem of 1694.", 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 59. Nuzhat al-absar."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now missing) ; doublures in red-brown leather ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla, pendants and corner pieces filled with assymetrical vegetal composition, along with gold-painted accents and stamped and gold-painted roll border framed by tooled fillets ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; endbands virtually gone ; in poor condition with much abrasion, moisture damage, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, loss of fore-edge and envelope flap, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (vertical) ; anchor in circle (trefoil above) watermark (compare Heawood 4).', "Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols ('two teeth stroke' logograph) rubricated and occasionally in yellow or orange ink ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas, discs, etc. and overlining in red ink.", 'Script: Naskh ; several hands, Syrian, Turkish and Persianate, all mainly sans serif.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: iii, III+5 (11), VI (23), 5 V(73), 3 III(91), V (101), V+2 (113), IV+1 (122), 3 V(152), IV (160), V+2 (172), V+1 (183), V (193), IV+2 (203), V+2 (215), VII (229), III (235), VI (247), IV (255), V+1 (266) ; mixed assortment of quires, perhaps what happened to be on hand ; p.150 left blank and marked "بياض صحيح" ; p.364 left blank and unmarked ; p.398 left partly blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during digitization, includes flyleaves).', 'Explicit: "كتاب الدعوي في شرح الهداية الدعوي مطالبة حق من حقوق العباد عند القاضي والمدعي من لا يجبر علي الخصومة اذا تركها والمدعي عليه بخلاف ذلك في الدرر"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي فضلنا على كثير من عباده المؤمنين وهدانا بنور العلم والمعرفة الى محبة الحق واليقين ... وبعد فلما كان علم الفقه احق ما يصدق اليه عنان الهمم واولي ان يحرك له القلم ... قصدت ان اؤلف فيه كتابا جامعا للمهمات حاويا في كل باب مسائل الواقعات وغرائب الروايات ... واوردت عند كل مسئلة اسم الكتب التي نقلت عنها ... ناويا ان اسميه عند تفضل الله على اتمامه وبالخير واليمن اختتامه بنزهة الابصار وربيع الاخيار باب فضائل العلم وادابه وسننه ..."', 'Title from opening on p.8.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Clear copy of the first volume of an anonymous work of Ḥanafī fiqh ending abruptly in Kitāb al-daʻwá. Partial table of contents provided prior to opening (p.6).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 498', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.74, transcription completed 18 Ṣafar 1212 [ca. 12 August 1797].', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and label on lower cover, "IL 389" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in shell marbled paper (in shades of brown, pink, black, yellow, etc.) with green leather over spine (effectively a quarter binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in brown paper ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, minor delamination of boards, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 21-23 mm. apart (horizontal), three hats watermark (see p.65, 66, 75, 76, etc.) and "G F" (see p.78) ; light cream in color, sturdy, burnished.', 'Decoration: Overlining in red ; abbreviation symbols and some corrections rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red hāʼ, inverted comma, etc.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Turkish hand in a narrow to medium line ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, some sweeping descenders and elongation of horizontal strokes, somewhat freely ligatured ; some passages vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 3 V(30), IV-1 (37), i ; chiefly quinions ; final leaf (after close of text) left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمت الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب م م م م م م ۱۸ ص سنة ۱۲۱۲"', 'Explicit: "نقل محض ظاهرة التعريف مستغنية عن التمثيل وحصرها متعسرا فليراجع لها مبسوطاتها ليحصل الوقوف على حقائقها ولله الموفق والهادي لا اله الا هو عليه توكلت واليه انيت وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم وصلى الله على سيدنا رسوله النبي الكريم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي لم يزل عالما قديرا حيا قيوما سميحا بصيرا ... اما بعد فان التصانيف في اصطلاح اهل الحديث قد كثرت للائمة في القديم والحديث فمن اول من صنف في ذلك القاضي ابو محمد الرامهرمزي ... وامثال ذلك من التصانيف التي اشتهرت وبسطت ليتوفر علمها واختصرت ليتيسر فهمها الى ان جاء الحافظ الفقيه تقي الدين ابو عمرو عثمان بن الصلاح عبد الرحمن الشهرزوري نزيل دمشق فجمع لما ولي تدريس الحديث بالمدرسة الاشرفية كتابه المشهور ... فسألني بعض الاخوان ان الخص لهم المهم من ذلك فلخصته في اوراق لطيفة سميتها نخبة الفكر في مصطلح اهل الاثر ... فرغب الي جماعة ثانيا ان اصنع شرحا يحل رموزها ويفتح كنوزها ويوضح ما خفي على المبتدأ من ذلك فاجبته الى سؤاله رجاء الاندراج في تلك المسالك فبالغت في شرحها للايضاح والتوجيه ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Clear copy of the commentary by Ibn Ḥajar al-ʻAsqalānī (d.1449) on his own Nukhbat al-fikar fī musṭalaḥ ahl al-athar, a treatise on the technical terms used in the science of ḥadīth, summarizing the work of Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ al-Shahrazūrī (d.1245).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1042', 'Origin: As appears in final colophon on p.155 (and colophons on p.32, p.48, p.65, p.130, etc.), transcription executed by Mīr ʻAṭā Muḥammad al-Ḥusaynī al-Harawī ( مير عطا محمد الحسينى الهروى ) and completed 12 Ḥūt [Asfand] 1299 Hijrī Shamsī, corresponding to 21 Jumādá II 1339 Hijrī Qamarī [ca. 2 March 1921].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Photocopy of Small white card with notes in German on authors, date and title (presumably in hand of Dr. Gruening, see letter from Schulte) and page from legal pad with description in hand of J. Eilts "in Persian | Panj Kitāb a collection of five poetical works and a commentary by Mīr ʻAṭṭā Muḥammad was completed on the 21st day of the month of Jumadah 2 in the year 1339 (1921) of the lunar Islamic calendar. It was dedicated to Sulṭān Aḥmad Kabīr of Kabul. One "book" of poetry is by Saʻdī and another by Farīd al-Dīn ʻAṭṭār. The other authors were not mentioned. Inside front cover is dedication to Mīrzā (Prince) Muḥammad Āṣṣāf Munajjim and the date 1310 of the Solar calendar." -- b. Photocopy of letter from Frank J. Schulte of Grand Rapids, to Dr. Howard H. Peckham, Clements Library, University of Michigan, dated 13 November 1976 and received 18 November 1976, describing and offering to the Library this manuscript and Isl. Ms. 1043.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 191', 'Binding: Heavy pasteboards covered in painted lacquerwork, spine in dark greenish-brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap), two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; doublures in fine painted lacquerwork of swirling floral vegetal composition in gold on a dark red ground ; upper and lower covers bear paintings (each unique) of swirling floral composition namely central panel filled with clusters of roses, peonies, irises, etc. in red, yellow, orange, and blue set among leaves in shades of green, surrounded by a heavy band of similar floral designs, all set off by cornerpieces and vegetal borders in gold ; sewn in red and white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and red, fairly good condition ; overall in fair condition with minor lifting and losses of leather, minor crazing, etc. ; ill-fitting and likely much earlier than text block.', "Support: non-European (likely Indian or 'Afghani') laid paper with roughly 6 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, quite thick and distinct, fairly straight) and no chain lines visible, thin and transluscent though sturdy, beige in color, well-sized and burnished to glossy ; tissue leaves interleaved at opening and close of many works to protect illuminated decorations.", "Decoration: Splendid illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of each section (p.18, p.34, p.50, p.68, p.132, p.140), generally consisting of a rectangular piece containing a pious formula (shahādah, ḥasbalah, ḥawqalah, etc.) in bold thuluth in monumental style, surmounted by a scalloped dome, hasp, semi-circular piece, w-shaped piece etc. (opening headpiece on p.18 surmounted by emblem of the Bārakzay dynasty [Bārakzī]) filled with bold floral vegetal designs mainly in bright blue or lapis lazuli and gold with red, light green, yellow, etc. accents ; many headings appear in rectangular pieces set off by flanking vegetal designs (or in rare occasions animals, see pp.60-63) in gold with red and blue accents on fields of blue, green, red, etc. ; written area surrounded by frame in gold with outermost blue rule ; margin also defined by blue rule-border ; written area of incipit and facing page at each opening accented with gold cloud-bands ; written area of preceding 'title page' or page at close left blank but surrounded by a decorative vegetal border and cornerpieces in blue or red ; keywords and headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.", 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant, spacious and carefully executed hand in a medium line ; serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and somewhat exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing in conjoined dots, gāf marked with additional stroke above shaqq / sar kash ; Arabic excerpts in a bold naskh seriffed with dramatic left-sloping head-serif on many ascenders, right-sloping head-serif on other descenders, rounded with many sweeping descenders ; some headings in tawqīʻ or thuluth.', 'Layout: Written in 12-16 lines per page, with written area often divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 10 IV(80), II (84) ; almost exclusively quaternions ; opening and final quires left entirely blank and unruled ; middle of the quire marks in the form of an oblique stroke in black ink in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Dedication: At close on p.154, dedication to Amīr Amān Allāh Khān ( امير امان الله خان ) [Amānallāh Shāh], king of Afghanistan (r.1919-1929), and Muḥammad Sarwar Khān ( محمد سرور خان ).', 'Colophon: "Authorial" and "Scribal," reads "امر بنوشتن مجموعه كثير المنفعه كه مشهور به پنج کتاب است فرمودند ... اطاعة لامره العالى به تحرير اين مجموعه مباركه پرداختم تا همه آن مجموعه مباركه سمت تحرير پذیرفت وانا العبد المذنب اقل السادات والعلماء مير عطا محمد امام مسجد ... حضرت سلطان سيد احمد كبير قدس الله سره العزيز ... فى تاريخ يوم چهار شنبه ١٢ ماه حوت سنه هجرى شمسى ١٢٩٩ يكهزار و دو صد و نود نه مطابق سنه هجرى قمرى ٢١ شهر جمادى الثانى يكهزار و سه صد و سى و نه سنه ١٣٣٩ تمت بالخير ...اللهم افتح لنا بالخير واختم لنا بالخير واجعل عواقب كل امورنا بالخير امين"', 'Title from closing matter on p.155.', 'Ms. codex.', '14. p.156-p.168 : [blank].', "13. p.154-p.155 : [copyist's epilogue].", '12. p.140-p.153 : [Risālah-i Qāz̤ī Quṭb ?] / Quṭb al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Ghiyās̲ al-Dīn [?].', '11. p.138-p.139 : [blank].', '10. p.132-p.137 : Ṣad pand-i sūdmand-i Luqmān-i Ḥakīm.', '9. p.131 : [blank].', '8. p.68-p.130 : [Pandnāmah-i ʻAṭṭār] / Farīd al-Dīn ʻAṭṭār.', '7. p.66-p.67 : [blank].', '6. p.50-p.65 : [Maḥmūdnāmah] / Maḥmūd Lāhūrī.', '5. p.49 : [blank].', '4. p.34-p.48 : [Nām-i Ḥaqq] / Sharaf al-Dīn Bukhārī.', '3. p.33 : [blank].', '2. p.18-p.32 : [Karīmā] / Saʻdī.', '1. p.1-p.17 : [mainly blank].', 'Splendid copy of a collection of didactic poetical works on proper conduct of life.'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Crown, horse, scrollwork, initials G(?)A in roman, and three crescents. For the last see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Contains astronomical diagrams, some colored.', 'Text rubricated and overlined in red; substantial marginal notes in hand of copyist.', 'min shahr Rabīʻ al-ākhir min shuhūr sanat khamsah wa-thalāthīn wa-māyatayn wa-alf [2 February 1820] ... ʻalá yad ... al-faqīr Muḥammad al-Ṭarāwī shākard bi-al-dīwān al-daftarī al-Miṣrī.', 'Date of composition and copying, and name and occupation of copyist in colophon: wa-qad faragha min taʾlīfihi al-mawlá al-muḥaqqiq al-kāmil Mūsá ibn Muḥammad ibn Maḥmūd al-maʻrūf bi-Qāḍī Zādah al-Rūmī sanat arbaʻat ʻashar wa-thamānīmiyah min al-hijrah [1411 or 2] fī baldat Samarqand ... qāla al-muʾallif fī tārīkhihi/suʾiltu ʻan tārīkhihi qultu la-hum wa-arrakhū/wa-kāna al-farāgh min kitābat hādhihi al-nuskhah yawm al-arbuʻāʾ al-mubārak li-sabʻat ʻashar yawman khalat', 'For an earlier copy of this text, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 817,1; for a later, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 805,4; for another, undated, copy, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 755.', 'Commentary on al-Jighmīnī\'s Mulakhkhaṣ fī al-hayʾah, "a treatise on theoretical astronomy ... compiled in 618 H [1221]." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 158.'])

en: (count: ['Contains tables explaining inheritance portions.', 'On p. [2], illuminated ʻunwān; text rubricated; marginal notes in hand of copyist.', 'Date in colophon: waqaʻa al-farāgh min taḥrīr hādhihi al-nuskhah al-sharīfah fī rābiʻ Shawwāl al-mukarram min shuhūr sanat 992 [i.e. 9 October 1584].', 'On the laws of descent and inheritance (ʻilm al-farāʾiḍ).'])

en: (count: ['Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests 17th century ; note on final leaf dated 1078 (1667 or 1668).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 65. Kamus al-salawat." ; "٢٨٧" on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (salmon, yellow, blue, green, etc.) with dark red leather over spine, foreedge flap, and edges/turn-ins ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in European laid paper ; sewn in light pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in cream, only headband intact ; overall in fair condition with some staining, abrasion, lifting and losses of leather of foreedge flap, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper mainly with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), and three hats watermark ; well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Some section headings and keywords rubricated (and others in blue-green ink, see pp.87-104) ; occasional textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) ; virtually serifless ; effect of tilt to the right ; occasional slight effect of words descending to baseline ; elongation of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 27 lines per page ; opening and closing matter in single column, otherwise in two irregular columns.', 'Collation: i, 2 VI(24), 4 V(64), XII (88), X (108), V-1 (117) ; final leaf of final quire pastedown (text carried onto pastedowns) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (includes pastedowns and front flyleaf).', 'Incipit: "اختصر هذا في كتاب تنبيه الانام في بيان علو مقام نبينا محمد عليه افضل الصلاة وازكى السلام تأليف العبد الفقير الى الله ... عبد الجليل بن محمد بن احمد بن عظوم المرادي القيرواني غفر الله له ولوالديه آمين الحمد لله الذي زين سماء الاذكار بالصلاة على النبي المختار ... وبعد فانه لما كانت الصلوة على النبي الاكرم والرسول المعظم صلى الله عليه وسلم', 'Title from inscription on opening leaf (p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Clear copy of selections from a collection of prayers categorized by type by ʻAbd al-Jalīl ibn Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad ibn ʻAẓẓūm al-Murādī al-Qayrawānī (d.1553?).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 613', 'Origin: As appears on p.257, copied by Bakhshī ibn Muṣṭafá al-Khāghalāʼī [?] [بخشى ابن مصطفى الخاغلائى] with transcription completed in 880 [1475 or 6].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. -- Inventory cataloguing slips in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, "IL 273" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather (upper cover) and cream colored textile [linen] (lower cover as well as spine and portion of upper cover to complete attachment of this replacement / repair) ; Type III binding (following repair) ; upper board lining in blue-tinted laid paper ; lower board lining in untinted laid paper ; upper cover bears tooled central motif and accents in annular stamps along with a tooled rule-border ; sewn mainly in heavy cream thread, two stations, also blue thread and four stations ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, staining, some spine slant (slightly cocked), etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper of perhaps several types ; mainly with with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines (vertical) possibly grouped in threes with 8-10 mm. between chains, sturdy though thin, well-burnished ; opening replacement leaves in European laid paper with traces of three crescents and crown-star-crescent watermarks ; later replacement (leaf carrying pp.17-18) in different European laid paper with "E B" visible.', 'Decoration: Overlining in red ; some notabilia (side-heads) rubricated.', "Script: Nastaʻlīq ; bold, elegant hand ; virtually serifless with very slight effect of words descending to baseline, occasionally more exaggerated, quite rounded with curvilinear descenders, elongation and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes ; text of opening replacement folia (pp.6-8) in a different hand, the same as that of the ownership statement for the physician Muṣṭafá ibn ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz on 'title page' (p.5) ; replacement leaf carrying pp.17-18 in still a different hand, though possibly that of one of the later owners.", 'Layout: Written in 9 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: II (4), V-4 (6), 11 V(120), V-1 (129) ; chiefly quinions ; replacement folia (pp.6-8 and pp.17-18) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "تمت هذه الرسالة الشريفة على ايدى اضعف العباد وافقرهم واحوج الناس واحقرهم بخشى [؟] ابن مصطفى الخاغلائى [؟] غفر الله له ولوالديه مع جميع من آمن بالله الرؤوف الرحيم تاريخ سنة ٨٨٠"', 'Explicit: "واما الحلواء فالعسلى معين والعجينى غليظ مولد للسدد "', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلاة والسلام على رسوله محمد واله اجمعين وبعد فهذا مختصر مشتمل على زبدة ما يجب استحضاره من صناعة الطب انتخبته من كتب الاقدمين ورتبته على عشر مقالات ..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf (p.3).', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of al-Jaghmīnī's (d.1344) Qānūnchah, a compendium on medicine and an extract from Ibn Sīnā’s Qānūn. Brockelmann treats this author as distinct from an astronomer of the same name who died in 1221."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 436', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at close, copy executed by Safr ʻAlī ibn Khudāwirdī al-Kaffawī (Sefer Ali bin Hüdaverdi el-Kefevî) with transcription completed mid-Dhū al-Ḥijjah 962 [October-November 1555].', 'Former shelfmark: "120 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on interior of upper cover.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in purplish maroon cloth with brown leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in pinkish paper with red fibers ; sewn in white thread, six stations, apparently over two wide tapes ; overall in fairly good condition with only minor abrasion, small split in spine leather, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced roughly 30 mm. apart and watermark of anchor (two line) in circle with six-pointed star above, mainly cream in color (a few leaves tinted pale yellow), quite sturdy though transluscent, burnished ; one bifolium marbled (blue and white) on only one surface.', 'Decoration: Written area surrounded by frame consisting of a series of gold bands outlined in black fillets with additional colored bands and rules (in green, blue, red) ; triangular accent pieces appear in opposite corners of the written area, for opening leaves contain text in white (nearly lost) on a gold ground with arabesque border in blue or green, but mainly contain chī cloud or arabesque design in black, red, etc. on gold ground with arabesque border in blue, green, black, etc. ; elucidation (Persian) often rubricated or in green ; textual dividers in the form of gold rosettes with blue, red, or green accents ; text of incipit page set off by cloud-bands in red lines ; margins of incipit and facing page gold-flecked.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; large, elegant Crimean [?] hand ; serifless with characteristic elongation of horizontal strokes, effect of words descending to baseline, etc.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 3 hemistiches (in six lines) alternating with 5-7 lines of Persian commentary / elucidation per page, all on the diagonal ; occasionally additional lines appear in the accent pieces of the opposite outer corners.', 'Collation: i, III-1 (5), 3 III(23), i ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمت الكتاب المجموع في اواسط ذي الحجة المبارك كتبه [كذا] عن يد الضعيف النحيف المحتاج الى رحمة الله تعالى غفر الله ذنوبه سفير على بن خداوردى الكفوى في تاريخ سنه ٩٦٢ تم"', 'Explicit: "جامی ارباب و فاجر زه عشقس نروند جوهر خود می شناس ار در وجودت جوهر است سر مبادت کرا زین رآه قدم بار کشی"', 'Incipit: "[بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم اعظم اسماء علیم حکیم] محترمان حرم انس را کوس شه خالی و بانک غافلش دردسرست تازه حدیثیست ز عهد قدیم ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of a selection of poems by Jāmī (d.1492) in Persian and Arabic with interlinear commentary / elucidation in Persian and occasional added elucidation in Turkish.'])

en: (count: ['On pp. [30-31], illustrations of the mosques of Medinah (left) and Mecca (right).', 'Illuminated ʻunwān; text rubricated and vocalized; gold borders; marginal commentary in hand of copyist.', 'Muḥammad ibn al-ḥājj Ismāʻīl ... li-sanat iḥdá wa-thamānīn wa-miʾah wa-alf ... sanat 1181 [i.e. 28 July 1767].', "Date, copyist's name, and sources for copy in colophon: wa-qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min takmīl hādhihi al-nuskhah ... fī ghurrat Rabīʻ al-ākhir bayn al-ẓuhr wa-al-ʻaṣr fī arbuʻāʾ al-shahr wa-qad ṣaḥḥaḥtu hādhā al-kitāb al-mustaṭāb min al-nuskhatayn al-muʻtabirayn aḥadahumā al-nuskhah allatī ṣannafahā ṣāḥib al-taʾlīf Sulaymān al-Jazūlī ... wa-nuskhatuhu al-ākhir li-ʻAbd al-Ghanī al-Nābulusī ... wa-anā al-faqīr ... al-mushtahir bayna atrābihi Qayyim Zādah Darwīsh", 'For other copies of this text, see Mich. Isl. Mss. 199, 249,2, and 852.', '"A collection of prayers for the Prophet, description of his tomb, his names etc., published several times." Encyc. Islam, v. ii, p. 527a.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 435', 'Origin: As appears in colophon, copied by Āghā Mīrzā student of Sayyid Amīr Dihlavī with transcription completed 1233 [1817 or 1818].', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather with maroon leather over spine (repair) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures and doublure hinges in dark red leather ; upper and lower covers carry gold stamped mandorla, diamond-shaped pendants, cornerpieces and frame with floral and roundel designs and gold fillet accents ; sewn in yellow thread, six stations ; lacks endbands ; spine repair has been laid over flyleaves, restricting access to doublures and flyleaves themselves ; in poor condition with with much abrasion, red rot, cracking, moisture damage, pest damage, delamination, lifing of leather, etc. ; housed in envelope.', 'Support: non-European (Indian or Persian) laid paper with laid lines running horizontally spaced roughly 10 laid lines per cm., no chain lines visible, many inclusions ; paper of flyleaves and initial and final leaves of quire are barely burnished ; central leaves carrying text have been highly burnished and tinted where written area appears ; some ink and pigment burn.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening consists of rectangular piece, carrying the basmalah surrounded by gilt cloud-bands and flanked by floral pieces, surmounted by a scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) with floral vegetal decoration in lavender, white, green and yellow on fields of gold and blue ; entire piece is surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area throughout is bordered by a frame with gold band and black, red and blue fillets ; gilt cloud-bands surround text throughout ; text rubricated with accompanying Persian text in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; Arabic text in a very fine hand with exaggerated contrast in thickness between horizontal and vertical strokes reminiscent of the earlier calligraphic style of Mīr ʻImād al-Ḥasanī, final yāʼ unpointed ; Persian text in a small, neat nastaʻlīq ; all sans serif with characteristic descent of words to baseline and superscript of final words/letters.', 'Layout: Written in roughly 20 lines per page with a line for each hemistich and for its elucidation in Persian ; single column with the hemistiches aligned with opposite sides of the panel ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, V, ii ; single quinion (the first two and last two leaves of which are blank) ; alternating double pages are left blank ; lacks catchwords.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," somewhat triangular, mainly in Arabic, reads: "كتبه العبد المذنب آغا ميرزا تلميذ [؟] سيد امير دهلوى ۱۲۳۳ سلمه الله تعالى"', 'Explicit: "انا الجيلى محيى الدين اسمى واعلامى على راس الجبالى [الجبال]"', 'Incipit: "سقانى الحب كسات الوصالى [الوصال] فقلت لخمرتى نحوى تعالى"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the well-known Arabic poem attributed to ʻAbd al-Qādir al-Jīlānī with elucidation in Persian. Contributions to the cataloguing from Ali Rafi.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 984', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. 133', 'Binding: Boards covered in black textured cloth ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a geometric pattern (resembling a scale pattern) in olive green or dull gold ; cover gold-stamped with "قواعد موفية [كذا]" ; sewn in white thread over two recessed cords ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Mainly lined / ruled wove paper, ledger style with a final gathering in machine laid paper with watermark of "GOUVERNEMENT EGYPTIEN" with star and crescent at center and other smaller crescents with three stars (see p.101 to close and compare Walz, "The Paper trade of Egypt and the Sudan," p.91).', 'Script: Naskh with influence of ruqʻah ; compact, modern hand in a thin to medium line ; partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on occasional lām, slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, open and closed counters, pointing somewhat in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed ; some passages in ruqʻah.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 16 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 3 IV(24), III (30), 2 IV(46), 2 II(54), i ; chiefly quaternions ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "النفس وزين بالتقوى وايد بالهدى وهذب بالورع وغذي بالذكر والله تعالى اعلم"', 'Incipit: "فصل اعلم ان الوقوف مع الخلق والنفس حجاب عن الحق ورؤية الافعال شرك لان افعال العباد مضافة الى الله تعالى خلقا وايجادا والى العبد كسبا ليثاب على الطعاة ويعاقب على المعصية ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of excerpts from Rawḍat al-ṭālibīn wa-ʻumdat al-sālikīn, a treatise on the principles of Ṣūfism attributed to the renowned al-Ghazālī (d.1111), attributed in an inscription penciled on the opening leaf (p.1) to Shihāb al-Dīn Aḥmad ibn Aḥmad Zarrūq al-Burnusī al-Fāsī (d.1493).'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: IMSC in roman; three crescents. For the latter see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'In Maghribī script.', 'Text rubricated; corrections and marginal notes in hand of copyist and other, non-Maghribī, hands.', "For other abridgments of and commentaries on Ibn al-Hāʾim's Muqniʻ, see Mich. Isl. Mss. 700, 701, and 702.", '"A commentary on Al-Muqniʻ, a poem on algebra by Shihāb al-Dīn ibn al-Hāʾim." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Illumination on title p. and p. [3]; gilded foliate decoration throughout; text rubricated and enclosed in gold borders; marginal commentaries and finding aids in hand of copyist.', "Date and copyist's name in colophon: tammat al-risālah al-masrūjah al-dhubālah bi-qalam al-faqīr Muḥamamd ʻIlmī li-sanat sabaʻ wa-thamānīn wa-miʾatayn wa-alf 1287 fī Muḥarram [i.e. April 1870].", 'On the interpretation of Islamic law and the adoption of legal decisions rendered by the orthodox schools of law; on pp. [49-57] are two fāʾidahs on the same topic.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 986', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 135', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "النظم الالهية | ابن سينا | J.H.D." ; sewn in white thread over two recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition though with curvature in boards (negative draw in lower board, positive draw in upper board).', 'Support: Wove paper.', 'Decoration: Text executed entirely in red ink.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 15-17 lines per page.', "Collation: i, IV (8), II (12), 2 IV(28), II (32), VI (44), I (46), 2 IV(62), I (64), i ; mainly quaternions and binions or single bifolia ; catchwords present ; pages left blank between sections with a few serving as 'title pages' (see pp.57, 65, etc.) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "عماهم فيه فسألوا ربكم درجاتهم واصبروا على نوائب دهركم تدركوا سعيهم"', 'Incipit: "ومما يدل على ذلك ان المانع من قبول الفيض التضاد والكثافة الطبيعية ولذا اذا تركبت الاجسام البسيطة المتضادة الطبائع واعتدلت استعدت بذلك لقبول الفيض والحياة بقدر الاعتدال والتوسط الذي هو تنزه عن جميع الاضداد وجمع لها باسرها ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of excerpts from a philosophical work attributed to Ibn Sīnā (d.1037).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 908 v.3', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 57', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and owners, as well as decorative accents over raised bands "الاسفار |3 | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine but appears to be over cords, in white thread, five stations ; stuck-on endbands ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper of several different types and sizes ; includes a few recycled leaves (see leaves carrying p.161-162, 385-386).', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, modern hand in a medium to bold line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 26-27 lines per page.', 'Collation: Pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Incipit: "فليمكننا ان نأخذ تلك الماهية كلية ... يمكن انه يوجد لها جزئي اخر لذاتها ..."', 'Title from inscription at opening.', 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy of what may be the third part of al-Ḥikmah al-mutaʻālīyah fī al-asfār al-ʻaqlīyah al-arbaʻah, Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī's lengthy and important work on mystical philosophy (ḥikmah / ḥikmat)."])

en: (count: ['Origin: Appears to lack dated colophon ; paper and hand would suggest late 14th or 15th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Two inventory cataloguing slips in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, "IL 278" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', "Binding: Pasteboards covered in now dull yellow paper with brown leather over spine, fore edge flap, and fore edge of upper board ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; sewn in blue thread, two stations ; overall in quite poor condition with much abrasion, delamination and losses to boards (recycled manuscript 'waste' used in boards exposed), fully detached at spine, etc. ; housed in box for protection.", 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines (vertical) grouped in threes with 10 mm. between chains and 52 mm. between groups ; fairly thick, now quite soft, well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords and headings rubricated.', "Script: Naskh ; large 'Syrian' or Egyptian hand ; mainly serifless and fairly vertical (without inclination to left or right) with curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots, shaqq of kāf typically represented by a wavy horizontal stroke seated above the ascender, alif of قال sweeping to the right, etc.", 'Layout: Written mainly in 15 lines per page ; pp.229 and 230 written in a different hand, in 16 lines per page.', 'Collation: V-3 (7), V-2 (15), V-2 (23), 10 V(123) ; missing leaves include leaves 1-3 of the first quire, leaves 5-6 of the second, and 5-6 of the third quire ; quire numbering in the form of full words appearing in the upper outer corner of the recto of the opening leaf of each quire (see p. 15, 31, 67, 87, 107, 147, 167, 187, 207 and 227) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "فقالت يا نبي الله تضمن لي على ربك المغفرة وأن يدخلني مدخل صدق ويلحقني بالصالحين حتى أدلك عليه قال لها موسى هذه الشهوة علي يسيرة قالت اريد أن يجعلني في المنزلة معك سواء قال لا قدرة لي على ربي جل جلاله قالت اني لا أدلك الا على هذه الشروط لان خزاينه واسعة وعطاياه مبسوطة وأوحى الله تعالى الى موسى اني فعلت ذلك لانه لا ينقص من ملكي شيئا قال فدلته على قبر يوسف وخرج موسى من مصر فوقف على نهر الفيوم وضرب بعصاته على موضع القبر فانفرق الماء نصفين وظهر قبر يوسف ونزل موسى نبش القبر وأخرج التابوت وحمله الى الارض المقدسة الى عند قبور آبائه صلوات الله عليهم أجمعين والحمد لله رب العالمين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد خاتم النبيين وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل"', 'Incipit: "يظهر نوره وما كان يرى نوره من صلب أدم عليه السلام الا محمدا صلي الله عليه وسلم في أكرم الطبقات فلما اختص بها محمدا صلي الله عليه وسلم وعن ابراهيم الخرساني عن ثابت عن اسماعيل عن سعيد عن جبير عن ابن عباس قال الله عز وجل نزل يوسف من صلب أدم الي شيت ومن شيت الى نوح ومن نوح الى ابراهيم ومن ابراهيم الى اسحاق ومن اسحاق الى يعقوب وكان لا يصل الى صلب الا ويسمع له دوي التسبيح والتقديس قال ابن عباس وكان يوسف عليه السلام نطفة في صلب أدم وكان يرى نوره في وجهه وكان نطفة في صلب شيت وكان يرى نوره في وجهه وكان نطفة في صلب نوح وكان يرى نوره في وجهه وكل ما دعا قومه الى الله تبارك وتعالى يقول له يوسف صدقت يا نبي الله عليك السلام السعيد ..."', 'Title from catalogue card.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Stories of Yūsuf (Joseph) illustrating Ṣūfī teachings. "This is an unknown and unpublished manuscript, different from the two other known mss. of the story of Yūsuf al-Ṣiddīq. [note supplied by Mr. Hootkins]" - from catalog card. Cataloguing provided mainly by Derek Mancini-Lander and Marijana Kavčič.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 983', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 132', 'Binding: Boards covered in textured black cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "ذكر اهل السلوك تائية ابن الفارض" ; sewn in white thread over two recessed cords ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Machine wove and laid papers of several different types ; opening type (through p.32) machine wove with watermark "Alex. Pirie & Sons | EXTRA STRONG" (see pp.2, 4, etc. and pp.66, 68), grayish in color ; next type (through pp.33-52) machine laid, sturdy, beige in color, no watermarks visible ; next another machine laid type with watermark "PAPETERIE DE RENAGE" (see pp.53-54, 63-64) ; finally two machine wove types, sturdy and beige in color (see pp.55-62, 69 to close).', 'Decoration: Section headings and occasionally whole passages of text rubricated ; others in blue ink.', 'Script: Naskh with influence of ruqʻah ; compact, modern hand in a thin to medium line ; partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on occasional lām, slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, open and closed counters, pointing somewhat in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 17-23 lines per page with written area divided to two columns.', 'Collation: i, 2 IV(16), V (26), III (32), I (34), IV (42), i ; pagination in black and red ink, Hind-Arabic numerals, first and second works (through page ١٤ of second work) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: [Qiṭaʻ min Dīwān Ibn al-Fāriḍ] "للماه عدت ظما كأصدى وارد منع الفرات وكنت اروى صادر" ; [al-Tāʼīyah al-kubrá] "من فضل ما اسارت شرب معاصري ومن كان قبلي فالفضائل فضلتي" ; [al-Burdah] "ما رنحت عذبات البان ريح صبا واطرب العيس حادي العيس بالنغم"', 'Incipit: [Qiṭaʻ min Dīwān Ibn al-Fāriḍ] "قصيدة لسبط الناظم عمر بن الفارض ضمنها ستة ابيات لجده قالها عند وفاته وهي من اشهر اشعاره نشرت في موكب العشاق اعلامي وكان قبلي بلى في الحب اعلامي ..." ; [al-Tāʼīyah al-kubrá] "سقتني حميا الحب راحة مقتلي وكأسي محيا من عن الحسن جلت ..." ; [al-Burdah] "الحمد لله منشئ الخلق من عدم ثم الصلاة على الختار في القدم آمن تذكر جيران بذي سلم مزجت ومعا جرى من مقلة بدم..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.71-p.83 : al-Qaṣīdah al-maʻrūfah bi-al-Burdah / Sharaf al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Saʻīd al-Būṣīrī.', '3. p.69-p.70 : [assorted excerpts].', '2. p.33-p.68 : al-Tāʼīyah al-Fāriḍīyah al-kubrá / ʻUmar ibn ʻAlī Ibn al-Fāriḍ.', '1. p.1-p.32 : Qiṭaʻ min Dīwān Ibn al-Fāriḍ / ʻUmar ibn ʻAlī Ibn al-Fāriḍ.', 'Carefully copied collection (majmūʻah) of poetic works opening with selections from the Dīwān of Ibn al-Fāriḍ (d.1235), followed by his celebrated Ṣūfī poem in tāʼ, Naẓm al-sulūk or al-Tāʼīyah al-kubrá and closing with al-Būṣīrī’s (d.1296?) celebrated poem in praise of the Prophet, al-Kawākib al-durrīyah fī madḥ khayr al-barīyah or Qaṣīdat al-Burdah.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 346', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at close of opening section (p.19) executed by Muḥammad ʻAlī Tabrīzī with transcription completed 5 Ṣafar 1286 [ca. 17 May 1869]. As appears in colophon at close of second section (p.41) executed by Muḥammad ʻAlī Tabrīzī with transcription completed eleven days later 16 Ṣafar 1286 [ca. 28 May 1869].', 'Former shelfmark: "379 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" in pencil on interior of lower cover.', 'Binding: Boards covered in seafoam green coated and textured paper ; Type III binding (without flap) but not flush (too large) ; board linings in untinted paper ; sewn in green-blue thread, four stations ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, staining, upper cover detached at spine, text block fully detached at spine except for opening and closing leaves still affixed to spine lining and hinges, lifting and losses of paper (particularly at spine), etc.', 'Support: Paper (possibly European wove paper) tinted a striking magenta color, quite well-burnished to glossy, thick and sturdy (possibly two thicknesses).', 'Decoration: Superb illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of each of the three main sections (p.2, 20, 42), mainly consisting of a large cartouche carrying a statement indicating the original patronage in white bordered in gold vegetal motifs set in a delicate array of swirling vegetal and floral motifs in black, white, light blue, red, lavender, turquoise, etc. and set in a well of turquoise or lapis lazuli ; written area throughout bordered in a gold frame, often with outermost blue rule ; keywords, section headings, abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke overlining some keywords), and occasional vocalization in white ; textual dividers in the form of four dots in white.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; exquisite specimen of Persian calligraphy ; bold hand in a heavy line, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, elongation and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes ; headings mainly in an elegant seriffed naskh or tawqīʻ.', 'Layout: Written in roughly 14 lines per page, with written area often divided to two or three columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 3 IV(24), IV+1 (33) ; exclusively quaternions (one anomalous) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: [opening section] "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمام شد اين نسخۀ شريف و بانجام رسيد اين نامۀ لطيف در روز دوشنبه پنجم شهر صفر المظفر سنه ١٢٨۶ در دار السلطنۀ تبريز بيد اقل خلق الله محمد على تبريزى ١٢٨۶" ; [second section] "Scribal," rectangular, reads "در روز جمعه شانزدهم شهر صفر المظفر من شهور سنه ١٢٨۶ هزار و دويست و هشتاد و شش من هجرة النبويه على صاحبها افضل الصلوة و ازكى التحية در دار السلطنه تبريز بيد بندۀ فانى و عبد مذنب جانى تراب قدم ارباب قلم محمد على تبريزى صورت انجام و اختتام پذیرفت"', 'Incipit: "جهة وزیری که رایات جهانداری و کامکاری به قبۀ فلک زنگاری ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Exquisite album of calligraphy reproducing several calligraphy specimens (qiṭʻāt / kıt'alar) executed by Mīrzā Sanglākh, Muḥammad ʻAlī Khurasānī (d.1877) for Muḥammad ʻAlī Pāshā, his son Ibrāhīm Pāshā, etc. including a selection of his own poetry in Persian and an assortment of offical letters and addresses, mainly in Turkish, from a range of viziers."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 576', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.315, transcription completed Muḥarram 818 [March-April 1415].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip, likely in hand of Yahuda, with notes on the manuscript (pp.7-8) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. (pp.9-10)-- c. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. (pp.11-12) -- d. Insert with notes (pp. 47-48).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 282a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather ; Type II binding (with flap, now lost) ; board linings in blue-tinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal decoration, compare Déroche class. OSd 8) along with a border in tooled fillets ; sewn in white thread, two stations, many threads broken or loose ; overall in poor condition with flap entirely lost, abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, negative draw in upper cover, etc. ; repair to spine in linen textile.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (20 in 29 mm., horizontal, fairly distinct and curving) and chain lines (vertical) grouped in threes with 9-12 mm. between chains and 44-48 mm. between groups ; dark beige in color, fairly thick and sturdy, well-burnished to glossy ; some leaves possibly tinted dull yellow ; flyleaves in European laid paper, crown-star-crescent watermark in front flyleaf (p.6).', 'Decoration: Keywords, abbrevations (abbreviation symbols), and section headings rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Turkish hand ; serifless with occasional slight effect of tilt to the right or of words descending to baseline, quite rounded and freely ligatured, some elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in curved strokes rather than distinct dots, initial hāʼ often looking like two inverted commas situated one above the other, kāf mashqūqah preferred, partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iv, IV-1 (7), 16 IV(135), IV+1 (144), III (150), i ; chiefly quaternions ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads: "تم كتاب القنية بعون الله والمنة في المحرم الواقع من شهور حجة ثامن عشر وثمانمائة هجرية"', 'Explicit: "فشهد عليه الوارثان المقران به هل تقبل شهادتهما كشهادتهما بالدين ام لا"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي اوضح معالم العلوم واعلى منارها ونشر في ملكوت السموات والارض اضواءها وانوارها ... وبعد ولما خلت عوالم الفضائل عن فقهاء البرية وكثرت وقوع الحوادث الشرعية ... قد شذت عن اصول المتقدمين ولا يوجد في شروح اكثر المتأخرين الا في تصنيف استاذي ... فخر الملة والدين بديع بن ابي منصور العربي ... فاستدفهت [استهدفت] منها لبابها وحررت على رسم سائر الكتب جوابها وسميته قنية المنية ورقمت اسامي الكتب والمفتين باول حروفها ..."', 'Title from opening on p.18.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the compilation of Ḥanafī legal decisions, abridged from the work Munyat al-fuqahāʼ of his master Fakhr al-Dīn Badīʻ ibn Abī Manṣūr al-ʻArabī al-ʻIrāqī al-Quzabnī [al-Qubaznī]. Table of abbreviations employed (p.16-17) and table of contents precede text (p.17).'])

en: (count: ['On pp. [39-40], illuminated illustrations of the mosques of Medinah (left) and Mecca (right).', "Illuminated ʻunwān on p. [1]; illuminated marginal rosettes marking division of text into ḥizbs; text vocalized and enclosed in gold borders; illuminated chapter headings; gilded rosettes mark phrase endings; copyist's name in colophon: Maḥmūd ibn Muṣṭafá.", 'Suggested date of 18th cent. noted on catalog card in repository.', 'For other copies of this text, see Mich. Isl. Mss. 200, 249,2, and 852.', 'Text (not this copy) published.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1048', 'Origin: Likely late 8th century on paleographical grounds as proposed by Déroche (compare cat.11, p.58 in Déroche, The Abbasid tradition, Nasser D. Khalili collection of Islamic art, v.1). Yasser Tabbaa has suggested a dating of 9th century on paleographical grounds along with the caveat that the tinting raises the possibility of 10th century Fatimid dating (see cat. no. 203, p.154 in The Beginning of understanding: writing in the ancient world, c1991).', 'Former shelfmark: Kelsey 64.2.3 (km1964.2.3)', 'Support: Parchment dyed a deep orange or salmon color ; recto is flesh side.', 'Decoration: Three oblique strokes one above the other (Déroche style 1.1.1) mark verse divisions ; circles in white (roundels of Déroche style 1.D.I) mark ten verses (on verso four additional circles or annuli also appear with the central circle) ; alif in white with contrasting outline marks five verses.', 'Script: Kufic or Early ʻAbbāsid script of Déroche style C.Ib (see George, The Rise of Islamic calligraphy, p.152 and Déroche, Les manuscrits du coran, p.40) ; short vowels provided in the form of white discs ; short strokes inserted at the end of certain lines to lengthen them (see Déroche, Les manuscrits du coran, p.21 and Whelan, Writing the word of God, p.114 and note 15).', 'Layout: Written in 16 lines per page.', 'Collation: Single leaf.', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. fragment.', '(verso) Sūrat Hūd (11) middle of verse 94 through end of verse 103 (11:94-103)', '(recto) Sūrat Hūd (11) middle of verse 88 through middle of verse 94 (11:88-94)', 'Fragment from an early ʻAbbāsid Qurʼān on parchment dyed orange-red (compare cat.11, p.58 in Déroche, The Abbasid tradition, Nasser D. Khalili collection of Islamic art, v.1 and Metropolitan Museum of Art accession nos. 40.164.1a and 40.164.1b) carrying Sūrat Hūd (11) verses 88 through 103 (11:88-11:103).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 162 b', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; script and ornament would suggest 9th century.', 'Former shelfmark: Isl. Ms. 162', 'Support: Parchment ; significant losses due to fire, particularly in opening section (first 13 leaves).', "Decoration: Illuminated roundels of Déroche style 2' A.II though with further perimeter in gold (incorporating dark green and red along with gold and black outline) mark ten verses (see p.30, 37, 45) ; illuminated hāʼ (abjad numeral 5) marks five verses (see p.33, 42).", 'Script: Kufic or Early ʻAbbāsid script of Déroche style D.I (see Déroche, The Abbasid tradition, p.36-37 and George, The Rise of Islamic calligraphy, p.91) ; short vowels provided in the form of red discs.', 'Layout: Written in 7 lines per page.', 'Collation: V+3: H1-2F H3-4F H5-6F H7-8F S H9-10F / S F11-12H F13-14H F15-16H F17-18H F19-20H H21-22F F23-24H H25-26F ; 1+V-1: F27-28H H29-30F H31-32F H33-34F H35-36F H37-38F / F39-40H F41-42H F43-44H F45-46H ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. fragment.', '(final 10 leaves, pp.27-46) Sūrat al-Naḥl (16) final words of verse 76 through middle of verse 103', '(opening 13 leaves, pp.1-26) Sūrat al-Naḥl (16) final words of verse 11 through final words of verse 54', 'Fragment from an early ʿAbbāsid Qur’ān carrying Sūrat al-Naḥl (16) final words of verse 11 through final words of verse 54 and final words of verse 76 through middle of verse 103 (16:11-54 ; 76-103).'])

en: (count: ['Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; script and ornament would suggest 9th century. Verse count of 123 provided in illuminated heading for Sūrat al-Māʼidah suggests a connection with the tradition of Qurʼānic transcription associated with al-Baṣrah (Iraq) via reports of the verse count for the "Baṣran codex" (al-Muṣḥaf al-Baṣrī), cf. such a report "وهي مئة وعشرون آية في الكوفي وعشرون وآيتان في المدنيين والمكي والشامي وعشرون وثلاث في البصري" in al-Dānī\'s (d.1053) al-Bayān fī ʻadd āy al-Qurʾān (Ed. Ghānim Qaddūrī al-Ḥamad, al-Kuywat: Markaz al-Makhṭūṭāt wa-al-Turāth wa-al-Wathāʾiq, 1994, p.149).', 'Former shelfmark: Isl. Ms. 162', 'Support: Parchment ; some abrasion, losses of ink and pigment, occasionally resupplied by later hands.', 'Decoration: Illuminated medallions / roundels of Déroche style 2\' A.II (incorporating dark green and red as well as gold and outline in black) mark ten verses ; illuminated hāʼ (abjad numerals 5) marks five verses ; illuminated sūrah heading for Sūrat al-Māʼidah, "المائدة مائة وعشرون وثلاث ايات" chrysographed.', 'Script: Kufic or Early ʻAbbāsid script of Déroche style D.I (see Déroche, The Abbasid tradition, p.36-37 and George, The Rise of Islamic calligraphy, p.91) ; short vowels provided in the form of red discs ; in a few rare instances small strokes have been provided in a similar brown ink to indicate one or two dots ; other pointing in grayish black ink supplied later.', 'Layout: Written in 7 lines per page.', 'Collation: V: H1-2F S H3-4F H5-6F S H7-8F S H9-10F S / F11-12H S F13-14H F15-16H S F17-18H F19-20H, V: H21-22F S H23-24F H25-26F S H17-28F H29-30F / F31-32H S F33-34H F35-36H S F37-38H F39-40H ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Ms. fragment.', '(quire 2, pp.21-40) Sūrat al-Nisāʼ (4) final words of verse 170 through final words of Sūrat al-Māʼidah (5) verse 9 (4:170-5:9)', '(quire 1, pp.1-20) Sūrat al-Nisāʼ (4) middle of verse 87 through middle of verse 112 (4:87-112)', 'Fragment from an early ʿAbbāsid Qur’ān carrying Sūrat al-Nisāʼ (4) middle of verse 87 through middle of verse twelve and final words of verse 170 through final words of Sūrat al-Māʼidah (5) verse 9 (4:87-112 ; 4:170-5:9).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1049', 'Origin: Script and ornament would suggest 9th or 10th century as proposed by Déroche (see The Abbasid tradition, p.37).', 'Former shelfmark: Kelsey 64.2.4', 'Support: Parchment ; recto is hair side.', 'Decoration: Four oblique strokes one above the other (Déroche style 1.1.1) mark verse divisions ; roundels / medallions of Déroche style 2\' A.II mark ten verses ; illuminated hāʼ (abjad numeral 5) marks five verses ; illuminated sūrah heading for the opening of Sūrat al-Qalam, "سورة ن والقلم خمسون واثنان" chrysographed.', 'Script: Kufic or Early ʻAbbāsid script of Déroche style D.IV (see George, The Rise of Islamic calligraphy, p.151 and Déroche, The Abbasid tradition, p.36-37) ; short vowels provided in the form of red discs.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page.', 'Collation: Single leaf.', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. fragment.', '(verso) Sūrat al-Qalam (68) verse 1 through opening word of verse 19 (68:1-19a)', '(recto) Sūrat al-Mulk (67) final words of verse 23 through verse 30 (67:23-30) followed by illuminated heading for Sūrat al-Qalam (68)', 'Fragment from an Early ʿAbbāsid Qur’ān carrying final words of Sūrat al-Mulk (67) verse 23 through opening word of Sūrat al-Qalam (68) verse 19.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1047', 'Origin: Undated though hand, decoration, paper, etc. suggest 15th century Egyptian production.', 'Former shelfmark: "138" inscribed in pencil on recto ; "75001" inscribed in pencil on verso.', 'Support: non-European (likely Egyptian) laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines seemingly grouped in threes (or twos and threes) with roughly 12-15 mm. between the chains and 35 mm. between the groups (horizontal).', 'Decoration: Instances of the divine Names (here الله , غفور , رحيم) chrysographed ; marginal annotations rubricated ; written area surrounded by a gold frame defined by black fillets ; illuminated textual dividers in the form of gold rosettes with red accents mark the ends of verses ; marginal illumination in the form of a roundel carrying the word ثمن (thumn) in gold on a blue ground with red, gold and blue accents, marks the close of one eighth (thumn) of a ḥizb or sixtieth of the text (here the 6th thumn of the 26th ḥizb).', 'Script: Muḥaqqaq ; carefully executed and fully vowelled.', 'Layout: Written in 12 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: Single leaf.', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. fragment.', 'Fragment from a Mamlūk Qur’ān, carrying Sūrat Ibrāhīm (14) verses 22 through 36 (14:22-36).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper would suggest 18th century. Dated seal impressions provide only approximate terminus ante quem but also may suggest 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 103. Kuran."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings, doublure hinges, and lining of envelope flap in shell marbled paper (pink and brown) ; fine printed fabric in yellow, blue and pink lining fore-edge flap ; upper and lower covers bear blind-tooled arrangement of rosette-shaped stamps forming a central diamond-shaped ornament and accents along with border in s-shaped stamps ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; endbands virtually gone, only traces of primaries remain ; in poor condition with much abrasion, staining, some delaminating of boards, fore-edge flap detaching from lower cover, lower cover detaching at spine, a few loose quires, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 13 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines (vertical) spaced 26 mm. apart ; watermarks include an eagle and scrollwork with lion rampant (compare Heawood 1262) ; fairly well-burnished and smooth.', 'Decoration: Richly decorated polychrome double-page opening with scalloped dome headpieces in green and red filled with swirling vegetal pattern and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) accompanied by rectangular panels carrying the opening text (al-Fātiḥah facing opening of Sūrat al-Baqarah), headings and the āyah "انه لقرآن كريم في كتاب مكنون لا يمسه الا المطهرون وينزل من رب العالمين" ; entire piece is bordered by a frame in red and green with rule-border at some distance in the margin ; verse dividers in the form of stylized red circles appear throughout ; rule-border surrounds written area throughout ; text rubricated with sūrah headings, juzʼ markers, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand ; partially seriffed with occasional right-sloping head-serifs on most vertical shafts in the majority of the text ; effect of tilt to the left ; fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, VI+1 (13), V+1 (24), 9 VI(132), VII (146), 6 VI(218), V (228), 9 VI(336), II (340) ; chiefly sexternions ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Neat copy of the Qurʼān with a few former owners' marks."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1009', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon though manner of calligraphy, decoration, layout, etc. are characteristic of the Qurʼānic manuscripts produced in Kashmir from the 17th into the 19th centuries (see Bayani, et al. pp.228-57 and Blair, pp.550-52). Perhaps 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 158', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; upper pastedown and flyleaf in a shell \'marbled\' paper (mainly in blue and brown), lower pastedown and fly leaf in untinted paper ; upper and lower covers gold-tooled in mitred-panel style with vegetal borders and three floral sprays in the central panel ; spine gold-stamped "SS" ; worked chevron endbands in red and yellow, in quite good condition ; overall in poor condition with upper cover fully detached, minor abrasion, lifting of leather at spine, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian) laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and no chain lines visible for the most part ; grey in tone and fairly translucent ; only slight curving of laid lines.', 'Decoration: Splendid double-page illumination (illuminated \'frontispiece\') at opening (pp.8-9) consisting of a series of scalloped domes in gold filled with floral vegetal designs in gold with black outline on a bright blue ground defined by heavy borders in bands of gold, black with white accents, and gold interlaced with red, blue and green accents, written area (in 8 lines per page with the Fātiḥah and opening of Sūrat al-Baqarah) is flanked by upper and lower rectangular pieces with gold cartouches (carrying the sūrah headings in blue riqāʻ or naskh, not extensively ligatured) and set off by gold floral accents on a bright blue ground ; similar double-page illumination at opening of Sūrat al-Isrāʼ / Juzʼ 15 (pp.204-205) and at close (pp.446-7) though here design affects a larger scalloped dome with cornerpieces and accommodates fewer lines in the written area (6 per page) with larger flanking upper and lower rectangular pieces (gold cartouches also lack sūrah headings) ; sūrah headings in blue and typically outlined in black bands with white accents ; written area and ruled margin throughout surrounded by frame in a series of gold bands defined by black fillets with outermost blue rule ; Qurʼānic text executed on bands of gold defined by black fillets and separated at some distance from one another (in other manuscripts has contained interlinear translation) ; marginal decorations in gold and blue mark ajzāʼ ; marginal juzʼ headings, notabilia (marking niṣf, thulth, etc.), abbreviation marks, mainly curved strokes and sigla for pauses "ط", large "ع" in margin to indicate bowing (rukūʻ), etc. and keywords in the commentary (mainly text being commented upon) are all rubricated ; verse dividers in the form of small red dots or discs ; text of commentary set off by gold cloudbands with floral accents in gold on blue grounds in the triangular spaces at the corners and center of the marginal area.', 'Script: Naskh and nastaʻlīq ; elegant Indian hands in a heavy line ; Qurʼānic text in a fine, bold naskh, partially but somewhat irregularly seriffed (occasional right-sloping head-serif appearing on lām of definite article, barbed left-sloping serif on alif of lām-alif ligature, etc.), fairly vertical though with occasional very slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders (some sweeping), pointing in distinct dots, fully vocalized ; marginal commentary in a bold, compact and well-formed nastaʻlīq, serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline, some elongation of horizontal strokes, kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred, pointing in distinct or conjoined dots, mainly closed counters.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 18 lines per page, with roughly 46 lines of commentary on the diagonal in the ruled margins ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iii, I (2), 12 IV(98), I (100), 7 IV(156), I (158), IV (166), 2 III(178), I+1 (181), 4 IV(213), III (219), 2 I(223), iii ; chiefly quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of black oblique strokes in upper outer and lower outer corners of the center opening of each quire ; final single bifolium ruled but left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Splendidly illuminated copy of the Qurʼān (muṣḥaf) with marginal commentary in Persian.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 537', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. suggests 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Blank sheet of grid paper -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- c. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. -- d. Scrap of blue laid paper with "Not missing" in pencil (at lacuna between pp.34-35), possibly supplied by Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and fore edge flap label "IL 280a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in yellow-tinted laid paper with tan leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; sewn in cream thread, four stations, sewing gone from many quires ; endbands gone (traces of primaries) ; overall in poor condition with significant staining, moisture damage, abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, etc. ; cover fully detached from textblock.', 'Support: European laid paper with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-28 mm. apart (horizontal), anchor in circle with trefoil above watermark (50 mm. tall, see pp.10-11, etc.), and "A C" under trefoil countermark (see p.13) ; sturdy, fairly thick, light cream in color, well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Keywords and abbreviation symbols rubrciated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas, hāʼ, etc.', "Script: Naskh ; angular Egyptian or 'Syrian' [?] hand ; virtually serifless (though head-serifs irregularly appear) with extension of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots (apart from three dots, often instead represented by a curved stroke), and free assimilation of letters.", 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 16 V(160), VI (172) ; almost exclusively quinions ; pp.34-35 left blank (full lacuna, but apparently without missing text) ; final two leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "وخرج بالمتعلق بكيفية عمل المتعلق بغيرها كالمتعلق بذاته تعالى وصفاته وذوات المكلفين والجمادات لمدلول الله لا اله الا هو خالق كل شيء ولقد خلقناكم ويوم نسير الجبال تم تم تم"', 'Incipit: "نحمدك اللهم على نعم لو ارام [لو رام] اللسان حصرها لوقع في حصر وعي ... وبعد فيقول المنكسر ... ابو بكر بن اسماعيل الشنواني ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of a commentary by Abū Bakr ibn Ismāʻīl al-Shanawānī (d.1610 or 11) upon a treatise on the basmalah by Nāṣir al-Dīn al-Laqānī (d.1550).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 540', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.149, transcription completed Rabīʻ II 1122 [June 1710].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slips in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.3-6).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 134" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in light pink-tinted laid paper with black leather over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and spine leather, delamination of boards, staining, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper mainly with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), three hats watermark (see p.10, 146, etc.) and "P Z" under trefoil countermark (see p.18, etc.), thin and transluscent though sturdy ; a few bifolia in another type with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark (77 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.142, etc.)., sturdy and thick ; all quite well burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of hāʼ in red ; overlining in red.', "Script: Naskh ; clear Turkish or 'Syrian' hand ; partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serif mainly on free-standing alif, effect of tilt to the left, occasional effect of words descending to baseline, curvilinear descenders, some free assimilation of letters, pointing in conjoined dots or strokes, point of final nūn set above or just inside narrow bowl.", 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 6 V(60), VI (72) ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمت في شهر ربيع الاخر اثنى وعشرون مائة الف سنه ۱۱۲۲"', 'Explicit: "ابو الليث وغيره قال جامع الحروف في هذه الظروف جمعت هذا الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب لنيل الاجر والثواب وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله اجمعين امين يا رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي علمنا الشرائع والاحكام وخلصنا بنور العلم من ظلم الشبهة والاوهام ... وبعد فاني اردت ان ابين الفرائض والواجبات والسنن والمستحبات لينتفع المؤمنون والمؤمنات ويصلون بها في الجنة الى اعالي الدرجات وسميته راحة الصالحين وصواعق المنافقين ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.7) and opening matter on p.18..", 'Ms. codex.', '2. p.12-p.149 : Kitāb Rāḥat al-ṣāliḥīn / Birgivî Mehmet Efendi.', '1. p.7-p.11 : Fihrist Kitāb Rāḥat al-ṣāliḥīn wa-ṣawāʻiq al-munāfiqīn / Birgivî Mehmet Efendi.', 'Careful copy of a legal treatise on religious practice (ʻibādāt), possibly by Birgivî (Birkawī, Birgilī) Mehmet Efendi (see Brockelmann, GAL II 440-442 no.13).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 419', 'Origin: Lacks detailed colophon though partially effaced patronage statements appear with each work, and the statement following the final work (p.168) is dated 1098 [1686 or 7].', 'Former shelfmark: "514 [?] T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures and lining of envelope flap in marbled paper (mainly in red and brown) ; upper and lower covers carry tooled and gold-painted central ornament in a diamond shape (filled with crosshatch pattern) with rosette accents and stroke pendants, as well as tooled and gold-painted border in a series of s-shaped stamps with flanking fillets and rosette accents ; sewn in pink thread, two stations, failing ; worked chevron endbands in blue and yellow, only headband remains ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion, lifting and losses of leather (mainly at fore edge flap), spine slant (slightly cocked), etc. ; repair to spine (rebacked) in cream textile.', 'Support: non-European laid paper of a few types ; mainly with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal or vertical, for most fairly distinct, some appearance of curving) and somewhat irregular chain lines (mainly single but with occasional groups of two) sometimes appearing about 25 mm. apart, cloudy formation, dark beige to light brown in color, fairly thin and transluscent, well-burnished ; another type with roughly 9 laid lines per cm. (fairly distinct) and occasional chain lines visible, typically tinted pale blue, mint green, pink or yellow, well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Superb illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of each main work (see pp.8, 46, 58, 138), each consisting of a variation on a rectangular panel with gold cartouche (in one case carrying title, see p.58) surmounted by a semi-circular piece or dome overlaid with delicate floral and cloud motifs on grounds in gold and shades of dark and light blue with decorative bands and surmounting vertical stalks (tīgh) ; headings, keywords, excerpts, and abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke overlining some keywords) rubricated ; headings in selection of poetry chrysographed ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas and gold discs ; occasional overlining in red ; written area and divisions within surrounded by narrow gold frame defined by black fillets.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) and naskh ; elegant Ottoman hands in a medium line ; opening works (through p.148) in a fine nastaʻlīq/talik, serifless with effect of inclination to the right, slight effect of words descending to baseline, mainly curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in strokes or conjoined dots ; final works in careful naskh, two clear Ottoman hands, opening hand (pp.152-157) mainly serifless, compact yet vertically elongated with dramatic inclination to the left, curvilinear descenders, open and closed counters, free assimilation of letters, pointing in strokes or distinct dots ; second hand (p.160 to close) partially but somewhat irregularly seriffed, spacious and neatly formed with slight tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, many open counters, pointing in conjoined dots, partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iv, V(10), IV+1 (19), III (25), 4 V(65), II+3 (72), II (76), V (86) ; chiefly quinions ; final leaves and some pages between works left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes added leaves serving as flyleaves at opening).', 'Incipit: [Rahatü\'l-eşbah] "حمد بيحد و شكر لا يعد اول حي وقيومه كه حياتى سرمديه [؟] در آز الده ... وبعد بو اضعف العباد اعنى وجدى ناصراد ... ونامنه راحة الاشباح فى بيان الارواح ديدم ..." ; [Risale-yi Hakikat-i nevm] "يا واجب الوجود يا فائض الجود جناب عزتكدن مأمول وعالى حضرتكدن ... وبعد بو فقير وحقير اعنى وجدى پر تقصير دير كه وقتا كيم راحة الاشباح نام رساله نك تحريرندن فارغ اولدمسه مراد ايدندمكه حقيقت نوم ايله حقيقت رؤيا بياننده بر رساله تحرير وآنده انواع واقسام رؤيايى على طريق الاجمال تسطير ايدم ... دانى اوچ مقاله اوزرينه ترتيب ايلدم وبالله التوفيق ..." ; [Risale-yi Kutü\'l-ervah] "منت اول خداي منانه مخصوصدر كه آدمك روحنى تشريف اضافت ونفخت فيه من روحى ايله جميع ارواحدن ممناز ايلدى ... اما بعد بو فقير دلداده اعنى وجدى افتاده دير كه بوندن اول بعض اخوان صفانك التماسلريله راحة الاشباح نامنده بر رساله مفيده تحرير وانده روح انسانى حقنده وآرده اولان اقاويله اجمالا تسطير ايتمشيدم ... قوت الارواح اسميله مسمى اولمغه ..." ; [treatise on eşbah, etc.] "نحمدك يا واجب الوجود ونشكرك يا ذا الفضل والجود ونصلى على حبيبك المصطفى وعلى آله وصحبه اهل الصفا وبعد بو فقيره تردد ايدن ياراندن [؟] ابراهيم چلبى ديمكله معروف وطلب علم ومعرفتله موصوف بر ياغار ورفيق وفادار ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from opening matter on p.9.', 'Ms. codex.', '14. p.169-178 : [blank].', '13. p.168 : [partially effaced patronage statement].', '12. p.166-p.167 : Hādhā Sharḥ Aṣḥāb al-kahf.', '11. p.160-p.165 : [masāʼil opening with "Masʼalah ʻan al-nisāʼ al-Ṭahārāt...etc."].', '10. p.158-p.159 : [blank].', '9. p.152-p.157 : [selection of poetry].', '8. p.149-151 : [blank].', '7. p.138-p.148 : [another treatise on eşbah] / İbrahim Çelebi [?].', '6. p.137 : [blank].', "5. p.58-p.136 : Risale-yi Kutü'l-ervah.", '4. p.55-p.57 : [blank].', '3. p.46-p.54 : [Risale-yi Hakikat-i nevm ile hakikat-i rüya beyanında].', '2. p.44-p.45 : [blank].', "1. p.8-p.43 : Rahatü'l-eşbah fi beyanü'l-ervah / Ahmet Vecdi Efendi.", 'Elegant copy of a collection (majmūʻah / mecmua) of several brief treatises in Ottoman Turkish on spirits, sleep, dreams, the afterlife, etc. opening with a work by Ahmet Vecdi Efendi (d.1633), followed by a selection of poetry and excerpts in Arabic on assorted masāʼil, etc. Contributions to the cataloguing from Hossein Mottaghi.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 40', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Inserts carrying notes (paginated pp.67-68 and pp.109-110).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 19. Al-Dai ila ashraf al-masai." ;', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in laid paper with dark brown leather over spine, foreedge flap, and edges/turn-ins ; Type II binding (with flap) ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; worked endbands in red and green, poor condition ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, losses and lifting of paper and leather, upper and lower covers detaching at spine, delamination of boards, moisture damage, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical) ; chain lines spaced roughly 30 mm. apart (horizontal) ; anchor in circle watermark ; quite thick and sturdy ; well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Section headings, keywords and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; occasional textual dividers in the form of three dots in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Syrian [?] hand ; virtually serifless ; both lām alif warrāqīyah and lām alif mukhaffafah mursalah used ; descenders mainly tapered and rectilinear ; closed and open counters ; compact in the vertical, with some elongation in the horizontal ; pointing in distinct dots ; even alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ ; occasionally vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V-1 (9), 2 V(29), V-1 (38), 2 V(58), V-1 (67), IV-1 (74) ; chiefly quinions ; quire numbering in the form of whole words ("ثاني كراس" etc.) appears on recto of first leaf of each quire ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Explicit: "فيقول يا رب الم تغفر لي فيقول بلى بمغفرتي بلغت منزلتك هذه تم الكتاب بحمد الله وعونه وحسن توفيقه وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم"', 'Incipit: "قال الشيخ الامام العالم العلامة شيخ الاسلام فريد عصره شهاب الدين ابو العباس احمد بن الحسين الشافعي امام جامع حمس المحروسة ... الحمد لله الذي اوضح لعباده الصالحين سبل الخير ... وبعد فهذا كتاب سميته الداعي الى اشرف المساعي في صفة الجنة واهلها وما اعده الله من النعيم فيها لخصته من كتاب حادي الارواح الى بلاد الافراح جمع شيخنا الامام العلامة ابي عبد [الله] محمد بن القيم رحمه الله وخلصته من المباحث والاسناد ..."', "Title from 'title page' inscription on p.1.", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the abridgement of Ibn Qayyim al-Jawzīyah's Hādī al-arwāḥ ilá bilād al-afrāḥ, a description of the inhabitants of Paradise, supplied by his student, Shihāb al-Dīn Abū al-ʻAbbās Aḥmad ibn al-Ḥusayn al-Shāfiʻī, via removal of the isnāds (asānīd). Followed by a treatment for qūbah (skin eruptions or ringworm). Description provided by Maxim Romanov."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 949', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, hand, etc. would suggest late 19th or even early 20th century.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 98', 'Binding: Boards covered in black textured cloth ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a geometric pattern in olive green to gold ; upper cover gold-stamped with title "مجموعة رسائل" ; sewn in white thread over two recessed cords (see gutter at p.34), also stab sewn ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion.', 'Support: Machine laid paper with 16 laid lines per cm. and no chain lines or watermark visible, burnished, light brown in color, thin, transluscent and crisp ; quite brittle with some breakage at sewing, tears, etc., some accretions and staining.', 'Decoration: Section headings and keywords rubricated ; use of red for abbreviation symbols, especially occasional signes de renvoi ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, carefully executed hand in a medium line ; mainly serifless with marked effect of tilt to the left, slight effect of words descending to baseline, curvilinear descenders, some free assimilation of letters, pointing in conjoined dots or strokes rather than distinct dots, partially vocalized (often in red ink).', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, V-4 (6), V-1 (15), 9 V(105), IV-2 (111), i ; almost exclusively quinions (some anomalous) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Hindu-Arabic numerals (begins with ٤٦) ; Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "ومن كلامه ورد كتاب سيدي الذي يؤمل لهلاله ان يبدر ولثغبه ان يستبحر ولمحار زمنه ان يفض عن"', 'Incipit: "عليك انت بزينب ودعد وسم ايها الرجل بسوى سعد ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine though acephalous and apparently incomplete copy (ends abruptly) of the collected letters of Abū al-ʻAlāʼ al-Maʻarrī (d.1057), renowned Arabic poet and prose author of the late ʻAbbāsid period.'])

en: (count: ['Illuminated ʻunwān at beginning of each essay (except no. 5); text rubricated in red and blue; text enclosed in gold borders; gold dots mark ends of phrases and verses; extensive marginal commentaries in hand of copyist; on p. [3], title in Persian: majmūʻah-yi rasāʾil-i shaykh Fāḍil ʻAbdī Afandī taʻl,iq 19[?]; vol. has edge title.', 'Date in colophon: taḥrīran fī awākhir Rabīʻ al-ākhir sanat sabaʻ wa-thalāthīn wa-alf [i.e. December 1627-January 1628].', '"A collection of essays (theological)." Cataloging by William Hoyt Worrell, 1925. Contains seven essays.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 383', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; İsmail Paşa claims in Īḍāḥ al-maknūn (Keşfe'l-zunun zeyli) that Katip Mustafa completed the composition in 1070 [1659 or 60] but material addressed in the text suggests a dating after 1663 (see p.35, etc.) ; paper certainly suggests 17th century.", 'Accompanying materials: Torn scrap with depiction of pyramid and Sphinx at Giza in gold on one side and text in Greek on the other side (paginated pp.135-136).', 'Former shelfmark: "۳۲۳" inscribed in ink in label on upper cover ; "78 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards (quite thin, semi-limp) covered in dark red-brown leather with recycled paper and linen repair over spine (possibly to reattach upper cover, now detached from textblock with spine leather visible underneath) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings (doublures) in an elegant marbled paper (mainly in blue, pink, orange, light green, etc.), hinges in a different marbled paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold-painted lozenge-shaped central ornament and tooled border ; sewn in light pink and blue thread, two stations ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper ; mainly with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 25-27 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of paschal lamb in four-lobed circle watermark (see p.2, 32, 96, etc. and compare Piccard inv. J 340/no. 86802 / Venice 1662 and Heawood 2840 / Verona 1678, and "agneau pascal" marks nos.1-24 / 1635-1670 in Velkov, Les filigranes dans les documents ottomans), burnished, sturdy and mainly cream in color with some leaves tinted pale pink ; flyleaves and occasional leaves within the gatherings (carrying text in the same hand) with 6 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of crown-star-crescent (80 mm. long parallel to chains, see front flyleaf, p.16, 134, etc.).', 'Decoration: Keywords chrysographed ; section headings rubricated ; excerpts from Qurʼān, etc. overlined in red ; written area surrounded by gold frame defined by black fillets ; textual dividers in the form of gold discs and red inverted commas (in threes).', 'Script: Dīvānī and naskh ; elegant hand ; serifs, looped descenders and many letterforms characteristic of dīvānī script, freely though not excessively ligatured with effect of words descending to baseline ; extensively vocalized ; Qurʼānic passages, etc. in naskh.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, III+5 (11), 6 V(71), I+1 (74), V (84) ; chiefly quinions ; final leaves left blank ; a few lacuna for rubricated headings, etc., in one case empty written area crossed through with red ink, see pp.137-138 ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Incipit: "حمد وسپاس وشكر بى قياس اول منشئ مناشير صحايف ارض وسما ... امانتى [؟] مشار اليه فاضل احمد پاشا حضرتلينه تفويض بيوريلوب وفقير وحقير واهب طريق انشا وراغب دلع املا كاتب مصطفى زهدى ... روضة الغزا اسميله تسميه ومرسوم ... دور بيان جنك استورغون وفتح قلعۀ اويوار خير اثار"', 'Title from opening matter on p.14.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant, yet possibly draft copy (müsvedde / مسوده, see inscriptions on pp.1 and 2), of a brief history by Katip Mustafa Zühtü ( Kātib Muṣṭafá Zuhdī ) addressing Ottoman military campaigns against the Habsburg Empire, namely the campaigns of Köprülüzade Fazıl Ahmed Paşa (d.1676), including the taking of the fortress of Nové Zámky (Uyvar) in 1073 (24 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1073/30 July 1663). Appears to include the text of Tarih-i Uyvar (compare Istanbul University TY2488).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1032', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest mid to late 17th or 18th century. Dated ownership statement on back flyleaf (p.103) provides a terminus ante quem of 1778.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 181', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in yellow-tinted laid paper ; lower cover carries tooled border and central rule ; sewn in heavy cream thread, two stations ; paper label on spine describes contents "كتاب في التصوف لحجة الاسلام ... والرسالة القدسية في العققايد [اي العقايد]" ; overall in quite poor condition with upper cover entirely lost, abrasion, staining, etc. ; repairs to spine in small pieces of striped textile at head and tail ; housed in carboard portfolio case for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper mainly with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of three stylized hats (tre cappelli, see p.32-33, 93-95, etc.) and "VG" (see p.36, 76-77, 84, etc.), dense and sturdy though not especially thick, crisp and transluscent, well-burnished, some leaves tinted light brown or buff ; flyleaves and opening', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated (mainly opening work).', 'Script: Naskh ; neat, carefully executed Ottoman hand in a medium line ; mainly serifless with effect of tilt to the left, rounded with curvilinear descenders, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots, open and closed counters, some sweeping descenders, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 2 V(20), V+2 (32), V (42), IV (50), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Incipit: [Risālah fī taḥqīq kalimat al-tawḥīd] "الحمد لله رب العالمين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله اجمعين رب تمم بالخير قال الشيخ جمال الاسلام احمد بن محمد بن محمد الغزالي رضي الله عنه جاء في الحديث الصحيح والنقل الصريح الوارد عن سيد البشر محمد المصطفى صلى الله عليه وسلامه انه قال اخبارا عن الله تعالى كلمة التوحيد لا اله الا الله حصني فمن دخل حصني امن من عذابي ..." ; [Risālah fī ʻilm al-nafs] "الحمد لله الذي لا يخيب من بابه امل ولا يحرم عن جنابه عامل ... اما بعد فهذه رسالة حرر في علم النفس وجعلتها ثلاثة فصول ..." ; [al-Tadhkirah] "الحمد لله رب العالمين والعاقبة للمتقين والصلوة على نبيه محمد واله اجمعين اما بعد فهذا مختصر رتبته على قسمين احدهما في اصول الكلام على طريق اهل السنة والجماعة وهم اصحاب امامنا العلامة ابي الحسن الاشعري رحمه الله وثانيها في علم الاصول الفقه وسميته بالتذكرة مستعينا بالله باتمامه ..." ; [al-Risālah al-qudsīyah fī al-ʻaqāʼid] "الحمد لله الذي ميز عصابة السنة بانوار اليقين وآثر رهط الحق بالهداية الى دعائم الدين ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from 'title page' for final work on p.73 and spine label.", 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.73-p.101 : al-Risālah al-qudsīyah fī al-ʻaqāʼid / al-Ghazālī.', '3. p.62-p.73 : al-Tadhkirah.', '2. p.49-p.61 : [Risālah fī ʻilm al-nafs] / Jalāl al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Asʻad al-Dawwānī.', '1. p.4-p.48 : [Risālah fī taḥqīq kalimat al-tawḥīd] / al-Ghazālī.', "Fine copy of al-Ghazālī's (d.1111) work on the articles of faith taken from his Iḥyāʼ ʻulūm al-dīn, preceded by a work on the unity of God (also attributed to him), a work on ʻilm al-nafs of Jalāl al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Asʻad al-Dawānī (d.1502 or 3) and an anonymous work on fiqh."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 217', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.33b-34a, copied, vocalized, and glossed by Mehmet Nuri, known as Niyazi [?], son of İbrahim known as Etham el-Vehbî Efendi. Transcription finished "wa-qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min tabyīḍihā..." in the first tenth [العشر الاول] of Ramaḍān 1293 [September 1876].', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather ; Type III binding (without flap) with Western elements ; pastedowns and flyleaves in shell marbled paper (lavender, blue, red, yellow, and white) ; upper and lower covers bear gold-stamped central panel (oval surrounded by floral vegetal band), floral cornerpieces, and border in architectural design with floral accents ; gold-stamped floral vegetal decoration in bands on spine ; sewn in heavy cream thread, four stations (in lieu of primaries) ; no endbands ; in good condition with minor abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper ; laid lines running vertically, fairly distinct but with some curving and sagging, spaced roughly 12 laid lines per cm. ; chain lines faintly visible, but quite indistinct ; quite crisp ; fairly translucent ; some inclusions and undissolved fibers visible ; well-burnished ; surfaced tinted to a rosy pink.', "Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) on fol.1b (p.2) consisting of rectangular panel dominated by floral decoration in pinks, greens, red and gold consisting of a central bouquet, encircled by flowers and flanked by swirling leaves and blossoms all on a field of stippled gold ; the piece is bordered by a well in white with red cross pattern ; illuminated headpiece on fol.33b (p.66) consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by intertwining floral vegetal decoration (evoking 'arabesque') in gold, white, blue, and red on fields of blue ; piece is surrounded by bands of gold flanking band of white with blue cross pattern ; illuminated headpiece on fol.34a (p.67) consisting of rectangular panel with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral vegetal design in stippled gold on fields of red ; piece is surrounded by bands of gold flanking band of white with blue cross pattern ; frame consisting of a series of gilt bands of varying thickness ; bordering the margin a gilt band outlined by black fillets ; textual dividers in the form of rosettes bordered by three dots (in gold, white and red), large floral pieces in gold, white, and red ; small diagram (a circle divded to quarters) pertaining to a discussion of lunar quarters, etc. in margin of fol.14a (p.27) ; text rubricated with abbreviations and numerals corresponding to gloss, etc. in red.", 'Script: Two distinct hands, one for the matn and one for the sharḥ, though apparently supplied by the same copyist ; matn supplied in a naskh, splendid Ottoman hand, seriffed with right-sloping head serif on all shafts apart from free-standing alif, slight effect of tilt to the left, kāf mabsūṭah preferred, fully vocalized ; sharḥ (marginal and interlinear) supplied in a a naskh/nastaʻlīq, with letterforms characteristic of nastaʻlīq, very slight effect of slant to right and words gently descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointed to convention and not vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board clearly evident, particularly in margin).', 'Collation: iii, 3 V(30), III(36), iii ; chiefly quinions ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "كتبه وشرحه ولكون الاعراب زينة للخط جعله معربا السيد محمد نورى الصوفيه وى المعروف بنيازى [؟] مأذونا من ابيه المرحوم ابراهيم المشهور بادهم الوهبى افندى استأثره الله تعالى بالرحمة والغفران واسكنه الله تعالى في اعلى غرف الجنان وقد وقع الفراغ من تبييضها في العشر الاول من شهر رمضان المبارك لسنة ثلث وتسعين ومأتين والف من هجرة من يرى من قدام وخلف"', 'Explicit: [al-Risālah al-shamsīyah] "كقولنا كل مثلث فان زواياه مثل مساوية لقائمتين واما محمولاتها فخارجة عن موضوعاتها لامتناع ان يكون جزء الشيء مطلوبا ثبوته بالبرهان" [Sharḥ al-Risālah al-shamsīyah] "فالمثلث الموصوف نوع من المثلث قد تم هذا مع ما بين سطور المتن في العشر الاول من شهر رمضان المبارك لسنة ثلث وتسعين ومائتين والف من هجرة من له العز والشرف"', 'Incipit: [al-Risālah al-shamsīyah] "الحمد لله الذي ابدع نظام الوجود واخترع ماهيات الاشياء بمقتضى الجود وانشأ بقدرته انواع الجواهر العقلية وافاض برحمته حركات الاجرام الفلكية ... وبعد فهذا كتاب في المنطق سميته بالرسالة الشمسية في القواعد المنطقية ورتبته على مقدمة وثلث مقالات وخاتمة ..." [Sharḥ al-Risālah al-shamsīyah] " الحمد لله الذي جعل ترتيب امورنا المعلومة مؤديا الى جهلنا وكان ظاهرا ... وبعد فيقول الضعيف الضفيف عند الله الغني السيد محمد نورى الصوفيه وى لما كانت الرسالة الشمسية متداولة بين الامثال وكانت رموزاتها محتاجة الى بيان الامثال علقت النظر اليها وجعلتها معربة بالحركات وبينت مراجع ضمائرها بوضع الاشارات وبرزت عيون عطوفها بورع العينيات ورمزت تعلقاتها بميم المتعلقات وكتبت تحت جيمها وبائها او فوقهما المثلات ...قال المص رحمه الله الحمد لله الذي ابدع ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Exquisite copy of the treatise on logic by al-Kātibī al-Qazwīnī (d. 675/1276?), fully vocalized and supplied with a gloss (marginal and interlinear) of the copyist's own composition. Three taqrīẓs (taqārīẓ) are included following the colophon."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 901', 'Origin: Colophon at close on p.551 is incomplete ; paper would suggest 19th century and dated watermark suggests ca. 1824.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Part of a page torn from 1913 catalog, Luzac & Co., with description and price for this manuscript "321 Tragedy of Husain. No author\'s name mentioned. Persian MS. Written on blue tinted paper of various shades ; in fair Naskhi character ; 2 inks. Small 4to. Leather. 230 folios. No date ; eighteenth century. 15s. One or two folios missing from the beginning." (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Recycled E. J. W. Gibb Memorial form letter with notes in pencil on the reverse, repeating description found in Luzac catalog (paginted pp.3-4) -- c. Slip with note "Persian Manuscripts [in pencil \'or lithograph?\'] (Heyworth-Dunne?) No Hussulman or Meredith-Owen notes" (paginated pp.5-6) -- d. Slip with note "Counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" (paginated pp.7-8) -- e. Matching piece of upper hinge (paginated pp.127-128) -- f. Scrap with Qurʼānic excerpt / portion of Sūrat al-Ikhlāṣ (paginated pp.195-196).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 50', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in dark brown leather with light brown, black and red leather over spine and board edges (producing effect of leather faced and edged framed binding, but likely repairs) ; Type III binding (without flap), two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; doublures in red leather ; portion of hinges in manuscript "waste" (recycled paper) remains affixed to doublures (matching piece for upper hinge has been tucked in to the book and paginated pp.127-128) ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in cream and lime green thread, fair condition, headband protected by tab extending from spine leather ; overall in somewhat poor condition with much abrasion, deterioration of leather, etc. ; possibly reuse of covered boards (recycled covers).', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; one type with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of double-headed eagle with shield at center and small crown above (see p.16, 28, 114, 150, 512, etc.) and cursive initials "B C ф" (see p.506, 507, etc.) ; another type with 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-31 mm. apart (horizontal) and watermarks of fleur-de-lis (see p.166, etc.), date "1823" (see p.160, 164, etc.) and cursive initials "A CA" (see p.108, 109, etc. and compare Heawood no. 3064) ; another type with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of Pro Patria with lion and initial "M H" [?] to the side (see p.58, 60, 198, 337, 549-550, etc.) ; still another type with watermark of date "1824" (see p.352, 408, 422, etc.) ; almost all blue-tinted (occasional bifolia or entire gatherings a gray color, see p.529-540 with Pro Patria watermark).', 'Decoration: Section headings rubricated ; occasional overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh in a form reminiscent of Bihārī ; spacious, elegant hand in a fairly thin line ; mainly serifless and quite rounded with curvilinear descenders, many open counters, large oval form for ṭāʼ, ẓāʼ, ḍād, ṣād with ṣād and ḍād particularly rather flat, pointing in distinct dots often oriented vertically, adhering fairly consistently to baseline, point of final nūn set deep in bowl, letters fairly uniform in height, etc. ; Arabic passages usually vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 15-19 lines per page.', 'Collation: 1+I+I (5), 2 [2I+2I] (21), I+I+I (27), I+I+2 (33), II+1 (38), IV (46), IV+1 (55), V (65), IV (73), V (83), III (89), V (99), II (103), 2 IV(119), IV+2 (129), II (133), II+1 (138), 2 IV(154), III (160), 6 IV(208), II (212), IV (220), II+1 (225), 2 IV(241), 2 III (253), II (257), I+I (261), III (267), II+2 (273) ; haphazard assemblage, some composed gatherings in which a gathering of eight or six leaves is formed by guarding together individual bifolia without nesting them ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing (includes inserts and drops six pages following p.386 with p.381).', 'Colophon: "Authorial" and or "Scribal" [?], reads "و قد فرغت من تسويد هذا الكتاب فى شهر ذي حجة من شهور "', 'Explicit: "لعنة الله عليهم وعلى سائر ظالمى ال محمد صلى الله عليه واله وعذبهم عذابا يستغيث منه اهل النار امين رب العالمين تمام شد کتاب امید که فایده کوبه کافه شیعیان ال رسول الله صلی الله علیه واله برسد و مؤلف عاصی را از خوانندگان و نویسندگان ملتمس است که چنانچه بر خطائی مطلع باصلاح آن این ضعیف را ممنون نمانید و این روسیا را بدعائی یاد نمانید"', 'Incipit: "چها که از تو بر ال مصطفى رسید کم تربک لما صرعوا من دم سال من دمع جری چه خونها که بر خاک ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from introductory matter on p.11 ff.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine though acephalous copy of a work in twenty chapters (مجلس) on the tragedies suffered by the family of the Prophet, particularly the martyrdom of Imām Ḥusayn.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 877', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at close on p.163, copied by Luṭf Allāh ibn Amān Allāh. Date of transcription not specified. Paper, hand, etc. may suggest 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with descriptive notes in hand of G. Meredith-Owens "MO 17 Imperfect at the beginning. A work on Muslim institutions (the Ḥajj, almsgiving, etc.) based in the practice of the Prophet as laid down by the Ḥadīth. Undated. Copied by Luṭfullāh b. Amānullāh" -- b. Slip with notes "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Meredith-Owens notes" -- c. Slip with note "Counted for 1968/69 Annual Report"', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 26', 'Binding: Heavy pasteboards covered in quite dark brown (to black) leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in dark red leather, current flyleaves in untinted European laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind stamped mandorla, pendants, and cornerpieces (each filled with vegetal composition), as well as blind rule borders ; now sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and blue, fair condition with some losses ; overall in fair condition with losses and delamination of lower board, some abrasion and staining, etc. ; repairs to spine (rebacked), likely resewn.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with roughly 6 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct, curving) and occasional chain line visible, somewhat cloudy formation, inclusions visible, fairly thin and transluscent though quite sturdy, well-burnished, dark cream to beige in color ; repairs (guards and fills) ; flyleaves in untinted European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Keywords (فصل marking each section, etc.) rubricated ; some overlining (with two-teeth stroke) in red ; written area throughout surrounded by gold frame with outermost blue rule.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; spacious, elegant hand in a medium to heavy line ; characteristically serifless with gentle effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct or conjoined dots, final or free-standing nūn somewhat irregular, but often set down in wide, slightly angled bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, IV-2 (6), 3 IV(30), III (36), III-1 (41), 4 IV(73), III (79), II-1 (82), ii ; chiefly quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of oblique strokes in black appearing in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf and lower outer corner of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "حرره لطف الله بن امان الله ریئ"', 'Explicit: "... در دنیا سبب نجات از فتن و حوادث و در آخرت موجب رحمت و مغفرت باشد و ما ذلک علی الله بعزیزه و تمت تم"', 'Incipit: "فتنه اشغال بعلم حدیث واجب دیده وضو رسوم حوادث را باین تریاق فاروق مندفع گردانید و جون علم حدیث بحر لا ساحل است ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant (though acephalous) copy of a work in Persian on matters of Islamic ritual practice (ʻibādāt) as attested in the ḥadīth of the Prophet. Contributions to the cataloguing from Elizabeth Kunze.'])

en: (count: ['Contains geometrical diagrams.', 'Text not rubricated; copy defective, faṣls 3-5 of maqālah 2 are missing and ms. may be incomplete at end; pp. [41-42] are in pencil in different hand on different paper.', 'On the construction of the astrolabe.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 824', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, hand, etc. may suggest mid to late 17th or early 18th century.', 'Binding: Unbound gathering ; once sewn in two stations, threads now lost ; staining and tears.', 'Support: European laid paper with 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), three crescents watermark (perpendicular to chains, 87 mm. long, see pp.6, 7, etc.) and initials under trefoil countermark (see p.2), thick, sturdy and well-burnished ; some staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Overlining in red ; some symbols of table rubricated, also ruled in red (see pp.9-10).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; compact Turkish hand in a medium to bold line ; serifless with effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes or conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Written in 28-30 lines per page.', 'Collation: Six leaves (three bifolia), likely constituting a quaternion or quinion lacking two or more leaves ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "و بدین طریق رساله ختم شد خطوط كشيده اسطرلاب تم تم تم"', 'Incipit: "که هم ظل اقدام ... هم ظل اصابع بیداکنیم ..."', 'Title from waqf statement (appearing on pp.1, 5 and 7).', 'Ms. fragment.', 'Acephalous, fragmentary copy of a treatise on the astrolabe, appearing to mainly comprise a Faṣl-i shishum dar maʻrifat-i khuṭūṭ.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 969', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 118', 'Binding: Boards covered in black textured cloth ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a geometric pattern (resembling a scale pattern) in dull gold ; cover gold-stamped with "رسالة في النفس" ; sewn in white thread over two recessed cords ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Machine wove paper, sturdy, beige in color.', 'Decoration: Text executed entirely in red ink.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; careful, compact modern hand initially in a medium to bold line, in final section in a thinner line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 14-17 lines per page.', "Collation: i, 4 II(16), i ; exclusively binions ; pages between sections (corresponding to gatherings) left blank, some serving as 'title pages' (see pp.9, 17, 25) ; final leaves also left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, presumably supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "اما الابرار فيشتركون في دوام البقاء بلا فناء وفي المعرفة الكاملة والعلم التام فيكون ذلك منتهى لذتهم وانسهم بربهم ولله الحمد رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "ان وجود النفس الانسانية امر فطري لأنها معلومة لكل انسان بالعلم الحضوري والكاسب والمكتسب هو العلم الحصولي ..."', "Title from inscription on opening 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy (despite lacking preamble) of a philosophical treatise on the soul, or perhaps an abridgment thereof, arranged in four parts. Attributed on the 'title page' of the fourth section to al-Ṭūsī (d.1274), but seemingly not his Risālat Baqāʼ al-nafs baʻda al-fanāʼ."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 451', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.261, transcription completed Rajab 1171 [March-April 1758].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From inscription on interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 26" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in block-stamped paper (repeating pattern of squares filled with rows of diamonds in contrasting black on dull yellow and red-orange on white, also lining fore edge flap and covering envelope flap) with red leather over spine, fore edge of upper board, and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted Europea laid paper (three crescents watermark visible) ; sewn in light pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in dark blue and yellow, quite good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with only minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10-11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-27 mm. apart (horizontal), grapes (raison) surmounted by crown watermark (see p.16, 17, etc.), and several words including "LANGUEDOC" (p.36, 37, etc.) ; sturdy though fairly thin and transluscent, burnished, medium cream in color.', 'Decoration: Simple headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.8 consisting of two empty rectangular pieces surmounted by a double semi-circular piece set into a well, all in red rules ; keywords, section and table headings, abbreviation symbols (letters representing the juzʼ, ḥizb, ʻushr and āyah, explained in opening table on p.9), sūrah titles and notabilia (side-heads) rubricated ; written area and table within outlined in a red rule-border.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand in a narrow line ; mainly serifless (though occasional serif appears) with slight effect of tilt to the left, some elongation of horizontal strokes, curvilinear descenders (some sweeping), pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots ; Qurʼānic excerpts vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in roughly 25 lines per page with written area divided to tabular format of 25 lines and 6 columns (passage of text, juzʼ, ḥizb, ʻushr, āyah and sūrah title).', 'Collation: i, 3 V(30), V-1 (39), V (49), IV (57), 6 V(117), V+1 (128), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals above letter ك in the upper outer corner of the opening recto of each quire from the second ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (includes inserts and flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تم وكمل هذا الكتاب الشريف في رجب الفرد سنة احدى وسبعين ومائة والف من هجرة من له العز والشرف صلى الله عليه وسلم"', 'Explicit: "يهدي به الله من اتبع و - - و مائدة"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي انزل على عبده الكتاب واتاه الحكمة وفصل الخطاب ... وبعد فيقول العبد الحقير عبد الله الوزير الشهير بچته جى ... لما احتجت الى وجدان ايات القرآن في اكثر الزمان سنح لخاطري الفاتر ان اجمع كتابا مع قلة البضاعة مشتملا على جداول في بيان مواضع الايات بطرح عزيب ووضع عجيب فلما يسر الله الاتمام سميته بانهار الجنان من منابيع آيات القرآن ..."', 'Title from opening matter (preface) on p.8.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of a concordance by Çetecî Abdullah Paşa b. İbrahim el-Cermakî (ʻAbd Allāh ibn Ibrāhīm, d.1760) outlining various subjects addressed in the Qurʼān in tabular form ; preceded by preface and table elucidating the meaning of the abbreviation symbols employed (pp.8-9).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 214', 'Origin: Final record entries dated Ṣafar 1026 [February-March 1617] ; copy likely executed just after.', 'Former shelfmark: "537 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro de Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in shell marbled paper (in shades of lavender, brown, etc.) with spine in gray leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in coated, green surface-dyed wove paper ; sewn in red thread, six stations ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of paper, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal or vertical, fairly indistinct), cloudy formation, thin and transluscent though sturdy, burnished.', 'Decoration: Superb illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of large rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche surrounded by arabesques and floral motifs in gold with pink and red accents on a field of bright blue (cobalt), bordered in a band of red with white crosses and surmounted by a scalloped dome or triangular piece filled with similar vegetal decoration also on grounds of gold and blue, all set in a well of gold bands and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; second illuminated headpiece (rectangular with empty gold cartouche and delicate floral designs in white, pink, light blue, gold, etc.) on at opening of main text following preface on p.4 ; written area surrounded by gold frame ; textual dividers in the form of gold rosettes ; some keywords and headings chrysographed or overline in gold, others rubricated or in white ink ; marginal decorations in the form of roundels setting off seal impressions (on the rectos of many folia see pp.2-3, 5, 7, 9) with gold and blue borders and vertical stalks, or carrying invocation "نحمد الله على نعمائه الجميلة وعلى آلائه الجليلة وعلى الطافه الجزيلة حمدا دائما كثيرا" (p.4) or vegetal designs (see pp.6, 8, 10, i.e. on the versos of those same folia, filling the outline of the roundel bordering the seal impression on the recto) .', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; exquisite Turkish / Ottoman hand in a medium line ; serifless with effect of inclination to the right, gentle descent of words to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in strokes or conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Written in 29-30 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, II (4), I+1 (7), i ; catchwords present (though now obscured in some places) ; pagination in Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "أن الشريف جليل ابن صلبي للشريف سيدى [؟] ابن الشريف مصطفى ابن الشريفة سلام من النسب الطاهر وذلك بعد أن أبرز حجة دالة على شرف جده وهو الشريف مصطفى ... معنونة بعنوان النقباء السالفين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي خلق من الماء بشرا فجعله نسبا وصهرا وربى شجرة هذا النسب بمياه الحسب والادب والتقوى وجعل أصلها آدم الصفي الذي اجتباه ربه وهدى وأطلع ثمرتها النامية السامية في غصنها الاعلى سيد الورى فصارت كشجرة طيبة أصلها ثابت وفرعها في السما ... وبعد فالسبب الداعي إلى تحرير هذه النميقة الأنيقة والوثيقة الوثيقة هو أنه قد تبين وبهر وتعين وظهر وكالشمس في رابعة النهار اشتهر باخبار العالم العامل الرباني خادم الشرع الشريف الصمداني ... شيخ الاسلام ... مولانا اسعد افندي ... ابن المولى المرحوم ... مولانا سعد الدين ... أن شيخي ومولاي ... الشيخ السيد محمود افندى الاسكدارى ... من النسب الطاهر وسيادته بين الأنام بين وظاهر ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '3. p.12-p.14 : Nat-i Hazret-i Server-i Kainat ve Müfahhar-i mevcudat', '2. p.11 : [blank].', '1. p.2-p.10 : [records of the office of nakibüleşraf].', 'Elegant copy of what appears to be a record book of the Niqābat al-Ashrāf (office of nakibüleşraf or nakıbü\'l-eşraflık) with each entry after the first (which is for al-Shaykh al-Sayyid Maḥmūd Afandī al-Uskudārī / Şeyh Mahmut Efendi Üsküdarî, d.1626) numbered and signed "شهود الحال خدام مجلس النقابة." Entries are followed by a poem in praise of the Prophet in Ottoman Turkish. Identification and contributions to the description provided by Ahmad Nazir Atassi. "Each entry is an attestation in front of prominent witnesses that a certain person has proven to be a sharīf by a document he produced that was signed by some previous Naqīb al-Ashrāf and that testifies the sharīfian rank of one of his ancestors." - from description provided by Ahmad Nazir Atassi.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 254', 'Origin: As appears on p.53, transcription of Risālat Dārandawī completed in 1174 [1760 or 61]. As appears on p.82, transcription of Risālat al-istiʻārah completed in 1182 [1768 or 9]. Opening work likely copied around the same time by the same copyist.', 'Former shelfmark: "339 T. D. M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "28" inscribed in pencil on ’title page’ (p.3).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in yellow-tinted laid paper and hinges in a paper printed with floral designs in red on white ; upper and lower covers bear blind-stamped (over black leather recessed onlays), gold-painted mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition, only slightly reminiscent of Déroche OAi2 3) and pendants along with tooled and gold-painted border ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; endbands mostly gone, traces of primaries and core only ; overall in fair condition with minor staining, abrasion, lifting of leather at fore edge flap, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 13 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 20 mm. apart horizontal, and watermark of "B | GM" under crest or crown (see p.10, 16, etc.) ; quite well-burnished to glossy, cream in color, sturdy though fairly thin and transluscent.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke), etc. rubricated ; overlining in red ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of heavy gold band flanked by black fillets.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Ottoman hand ; partially though inconsistently seriffed and quite rounded with slight effect of tilt to the left, adheres to baseline, point of final nūn often assimilated with bowl, pointing (for two and three dots) mainly in strokes or conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 4 V(40), i ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon:', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.54-p.82 : Risālat al-istiʻārah / Abū al-Nāfiʻ Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad al-Qāzābādī.', '3. p.44-p.53 : [Risālat Dārandawī fī al-basmalah] / Dârendevi Hamza Efendi [?].', '2. p.42-p.43 : [blank].', '1. p.4-p.41 : [Risālah fī al-tasmiyah wa-al-taḥmīd wa-al-taṣliyah].', 'Fine copy of three brief treatises, first a treatise on the tasmiyah, taḥmīd and taṣliyah, followed by a treatise on the basmalah by Darendevi [Darendeli] Hamza Efendi (d. 1753), followed by a treatise on rhetoric by Abū al-Nāfiʻ Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Isḥāq al-Qāzābādī (d.1749).'])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated; marginal corrections in hand of copyist; copy defective, only muqaddimah, first 4 bābs, and colophon remain.', 'Date of 1457 given in colophon probably date of exemplar: tammat al-risālah ... fī al-yawm al-khāmis ʻashar fī shahr Jumādī al-awwal fī shuhūr sanat iḥdī wa-sittīn thamānimiyah. On p. [1] is note: bi-khaṭṭ muʾallifihā al-ʻallāmah Muḥammad al-Tīzīnī al-Ḥalabī. Seemingly high acid content of paper, very brown and slightly brittle, suggests late 19th-cent. date.', 'A treatise on the use of the sine quadrant; another text called fāydah fī maʻrifat al-shams appended after colophon, only first 2 pp. of this text survive.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Three crescents. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Contains a table and geometrical diagrams.', 'In Maghribī script.', 'Text rubricated; pp. [1-4] and [17-31] are same copyist as that of Mich. Isl. Ms. 793,2; pp. [5-16] are in a different [earlier?] hand.', 'Date based on discussion in text of Mich. Isl. Ms. 793,2.', 'Pp. [1-41]. Bound with: Maʻrifat al-sanah al-shamsīyah, pp. [42-56].', 'Pp. [1-31] are a treatise on the sine quadrant; pp. [32-41] are scraps of items in prose and verse identified in the work in hand as being by Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad ibn Ghāzī, Aḥmad al-Tūnisī, and Ḥasan al-Sharīfī.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: No. 13/MILL.', 'Text rubricated; contains thumbnail sketches of the constellations.', "Earliest date probably late 19th cent. based on appearance of paper and note in colophon with copyist's name, suggesting exemplar was in a library collection: nuqilat min ḍimn majmūʻah taṭ raqm 198 m mīqāt wa-nasakha dhālik al-ʻabd al-faqīr ... Maḥmūd Ṣidqī al-Nassākh.", 'Believed to have been lost, this work contains "an explanation of the system of the anwāʾ [\'the acronychal setting of a star or constellation and the heliacal rising of its opposite (raqīb)\'], a list of the mansions,... etc.; the explanation is accompanied by maxims and poetry." Charles Pellat, "Anwāʾ," Encyclopedia of Islam, v. i (Leiden, 1957), p. 523b.'])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated, with thin orange borders; copyist same as that of 810,2.', 'Pp. [1-5]. Bound with: Badr al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad Sibṭ al-Māridīnī, Risālah fī al-ʻamal bi-al-rubʻ al-mujayyab, pp. [6-17].', 'Set of rules for the use of tables for setting pocket watches at latitude 30⁰ (Cairo), based on the Natījat al-afkār of Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Lādhiqī.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Andrea Galvani of Pordenone. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 36 and no. 360.', 'Contains diagrams of sundial markings and astronomical tables.', 'Text not rubricated; corrections in hand of copyist; kurrāsahs numbered: k ʻadad [1-4].', 'Date in colophon: wa-kāna al-farāgh min kitābat hādhihi al-risālah al-laṭīfah yawm al-arbuʻāʾ al-muwāfiq ithná wa-ʻishrīn yawman khalat min shahr Jumādá al-thānī sanat 1299 [i.e. 11 May 1882] ... ʻalá yad kātibihā al-faqīr ... Muḥammad ʻIrāqī al-Shiblanjī [?].', 'For another, defective copy of this text, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 779.', 'On sundials, in a muqaddimah, three bābs, and a khātimah.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 896', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest late 19th century ; bookseller's label suggests terminus ante quem in the range of 1886 to 1916.", 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with note "Persian [crossed out] Arabic Manuscripts (Heyworth Dunne?) No Husselman or Meredith-Owen notes" -- b. Slip with note "Counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" -- c. Recycled card with notes in pencil "Maghribi script – N. African script (not incl. Egypt) | same writer as that of the pencilled ms. [i.e. Isl. Ms. 898] | apparently transcribed from anr. ms. (on right) & his notes on how to puzzle it out (on left)"', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 45', 'Binding: Fiber boards covered in shell marbled paper (mainly in brown, blue and dark pink) with dark brown cloth over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted wove paper ; sewn in heavy cream thread, four stations, over two wide tapes / bands (flexible sewing) ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of paper, board and cloth, etc.', 'Support: European "laid" paper (no watermarks visible) upon which leaves carrying the transcript have been affixed (every other leaf) ; compare Isl. Ms. 898.', 'Script: Maghribī script ; crudely executed in pencil in imitation of the exemplar, mainly serifless and rounded with sweeping descenders, spur-like tail on alif of prolongation, slight effect of inclination to the right, etc. (compare transcript of Isl. Ms. 898).', 'Layout: Transcript written mainly in 17 lines per page ; every other leaf carries a varying number of clarifications or glosses of vocabulary from the Arabic text as well as notes in English.', 'Collation: i, V+1 (11), XI (29), VIII (45), i ; leaves of transcript have been mounted in such a way as to allow space for annotations on facing pages, many of which are thus partially or fully blank ; catchwords present in transcript (as they appeared in the exemplar) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, appears only on leaves carrying the transcript.', 'Explicit: "والغزال في السحراء والطيور النعام في السحراء ايضا وهذا ما وجدنا في الاخبار والله يوفقنا لما يجب ويحبه ويرضاه كملت"', 'Incipit: "فصل في معرفة قبائل المغرب الذين هم محدودين في حكومة السلطان الاعظم الخليفة الافخم الشريف الجليل الماجد الاصيل مولانا سليمن [سليمان] بن مولانا محمد بن مولانا عبد الله بن مولانا اسماعيل نصره [؟] الله وخلد ملكه ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Crude transcript (arranged for annotation) of an excerpt of a larger work containing an account of the tribes and regions of Morocco under the ʻAlawī sulṭān, Sulaymān ibn Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd Allāh ibn Ismāʻīil (d.1822).'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Andrea Galvani of Pordenone. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 36 and no. 860.', 'Contains a table showing the relationships between qirāṭs, dirhams, and uqqahs.', 'Text and table rubricated; kurrāsahs numbered 6-8.', "Date and copyist's name in colophon on p. [12]: najaza naskhahā fī yawm al-thulāthā ḥādī ʻashar Ṣafar al-khayr ʻām 1047 [i.e. 5 July 1637] ʻalá yad ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Muḥammad Walī al-Dīn al-Birlisī[?] al-Shāfiʻī....", 'On the conversion of weights and measures; probably once bound with other works; copy defective (unknown number of pages missing before p. [1] and between pp. [2-3], [14-15], and [27-28]).'])

en: (count: ['Title and text rubricated; marginal corrections in hand of copyist.', 'Pp. [1-20]. Pp. [21-24] contain an unidentified text.', 'times of prayer.', '"A treatise on the sine quadrant and almuqantar quadrant in three risālahs, the first two comprising 5 maqālahs and dealing with the two quadrants together and the third comprising 7 faṣls and dealing with the determination of the prayer-times and qibla with a sine quadrant." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 65. This copy contains the third risālah only, in 6 faṣls, about the use of the almucantar to find the qiblah and'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Three crescents. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Text not rubricated.', '"Apparently a compilation of extracts relating to the quadrant called shamālī al-maqṭūʻ, taken from the works of Sibṭ al-Māridīnī. It is in a muḳaddima and 20 bābs, and is not the same as Kifāyat al-ḳunūʻ fī \'l-ʻamal bi \'l-rubʻ al-maḳṭūʻ, in a muḳaddima and 15 bābs, also in this collection [Mich. Isl. Mss. 749,1 and 750,1]." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 97', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.447, transcription finished ("wa-qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min taḥrīr hādhā al-kitāb...") in the first part of Jumādá I 929 [March 1523].', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No.146. Glosses on the Wikayah."', 'Binding: Pasteboard covered in dark brown leather with red-brown leather repairs on spine and at edges/turn-ins ; Type II binding (with flap, now lost) ; board linings in laid paper ; cover bears blind-stamped scalloped mandorla with floral vegetal composition (compare Déroche class. OAi2 5) ; sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and sky blue, fine condition ; overall in poor condition with upper cover and flap lost, significant abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines grouped in threes with 9-10 mm. between the chains and roughly 35 mm. between groups ; well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviations rubricated ; occasional overlining and textual divders in the form of discs in red ; written area (opening through p.64 and then p.251 to close) surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq ; virtually serifless ; mainly closed counters ; effect of words descending to baseline, occasionally more exaggerated ; occasional extension of horizontal strokes ; colophon in thuluth.', 'Layout: Written in 29 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 6 V(60), II+2 (66), V (76), II (80), 4 V(120), II (124), 6 V(184), IV+1 (193) ; chiefly quinions ; p.134 and p.444 left blank, unmarked ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and inserts ; drops from p.132 to p.131 thus repeating pp.131-132).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "وقد وقع الفراغ من تحرير هذا الكتاب في اوائل جمادى الاولى في سنة تسع وعشرين وتسعمائة"', 'Explicit: "وان لم يمتد اعتقاله او لم يعلم اشاراته لم يكن حكمه حكم الاخرين فلا يعتبر اشارته و كتابته تم بعون الله تع"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذى شرح صدر الشريعة الغراء ... وبعد فان تكميل النفوس الانسانية بالفضائل القدسية و تحليتها بالخصائل الانسية... فشرعت فيها ثانيا بعد ايابي من تلك الاراضي المقدسة ... وسميتها بذخيرة العقبى في شرح صدر الشريعة العظمى ..."', 'Title from opening (p.7).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the gloss by Yūsuf ibn Junayd Akhī Chelebi on Sharḥ al-Wiqāyah by Ṣadr al-Sharīʻah al-Aṣghar (al-Thānī) ʻUbayd Allāh ibn Masʻūd al-Maḥbūbī, itself a commentary on Wiqāyat al-riwāyah fī masāʼil al-Hidāyah by Maḥmūd ibn Ṣadr al-Sharīʻah al-Maḥbūbī, an epitome on the celebrated work of Ḥanafī fiqh, al-Hidāyah by ʻAlī ibn Abī Bakr al-Marghīnānī. (see Isl. Ms. 86 for another ms. copy of this work).'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: initials EIV in roman; Andrea Galvani of Pordenone. For the latter see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 36 and no. 360.', 'Contains astronomical tables.', 'Text rubricated, some rubrications absent; corrections in hand of copyist.', 'For another, complete copy of this text, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 777.', 'On sundials, in a muqaddimah, three bābs, and a khātimah. Copy defective: text missing after middle of bāb 2, some tables drawn but lack entries.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 875', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, hand, etc. may suggest 19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with description in hand of G. Meredith-Owens "MO 7. Risāleh-i Maṭlūb al-fuqarā va Muntakhab-i irshād al-vāṣilīn. A Ṣūfī tract. No date. XIXth century?" -- b. Recycled card with Emilie Savage-Smith [?] notes "Sufi writing" -- c. Slip with note "counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" -- d. Slip with "n. f." [i.e. not found, likely in hand of E. Husselman].', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 24', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in teal or blue-green block-printed paper (scrollwork and vegetal designs in brown) with brown paper over spine and board corners (half-binding) ; Western style binding ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; sewn in heavy white thread, three stations ; overall in somewhat poor condition with moisture damage, abrasion, lifting and losses of paper, staining, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian or Persian) laid paper with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, somewhat indistinct, curved) and no chain lines plainly visible, thin and transluscent though sturdy, burnished, cream in color ; ink bleed through somewhat obscures text ; opening added leaf carrying table of contents (p.3) in European laid paper with watermark of scrollwork with flanking lion and eagle at center partially visible.', 'Decoration: Keywords, headings and some symbols (numerals, etc.) rubricated ; written area surrounded by double rule-border in red ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; quick hand in a heavy line ; mainly serifless with marked effect of tilt to the right, slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, freely ligatured, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 13 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: VIII+1 (17) ; catchwords present ; pagination in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "خوردن و خوراندن حرام است این رساله را مطلوب الفقرا و منتخب ارشاد الواصلین نام نهاده شد تمت تمام شد ختم رساله"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمین والعاقبت للمتقین ... بدان اى درویش که دلق فقیری پوشیدن ..."', 'Title from rubricated heading at opening on p.6.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of an anonymous Ṣūfī treatise. Table of contents (فهرست) at opening on p.3.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 874', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest 19th or possibly early 20th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with description in hand of G. Meredith-Owens "MO 9 Risāleh-i maʻrifat al-maẕāhib | A religious work (on the various sects etc.) by Maḥmūd Ṭāhir Ghazzālī. Undated" -- b. Recycled card with notes in pencil "Indian ms. & binding | blue paper is typical of Indian book production / per Emilie Savage-Smith" -- c. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Meredith-Owens notes" -- d. Slip with "n. f." [i.e. not found, likely in hand of E. Husselman] -- e. Slip with note "counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" -- f. Tipped in just inside upper cover, slip with verse from the Qurʼān (Sūrat al-Aḥzāb verse 72, 33:72) with English translation (that of George Sale) and citation "vid: Sales Koran Vol.2 ch: 33 p.285"', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 23', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with brown leather over spine and board corners in brown cloth (half-binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted laid paper ; sewn in heavy white thread, three stations ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, lifting and losses of spine leather, staining, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of scrollwork with crown above and "G M" below as well as "ALMASSO" (see p.10, 14, 15, 19, etc.), thin and transluscent though sturdy, tinted blue.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth mark over keywords) rubricated ; written area surrounded by double rule-border in red ; tables at close on pp.23-24.', "Script: Nastaʻlīq ; quick hand in a medium line ; mainly serifless with marked effect of tilt to the right, slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, freely ligatured, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots ; passages in Arabic (Qurʼānic excerpts, etc.) in a crude 'naskh'.", 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V+1, i (11) ; catchwords present ; pagination in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Explicit: "... بیان هفتاد و دو گروه باطل اینست که بسمع مبارک سنیان پاک دین و متابعان حضرت نبوی صلی الله و علیه و سلم و سروران اصحاب بزرگوار و محبان چهار یار و مشایخ کبار رسانیده شد باید که از این چیزهای مخالف مذهب خود پرهیز کنند تا سعادت یابند تخته بر هفتاد و دو ملت محمدی مختصر کرده است ..."', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين المحمود الطاهر المعبود ... بعد میگوید بنده ضعیف امیدوار پروردگار متعالی محمود طاهر غزالی بنظام مدرس مدرسه جلالی غفر الله له ... شناخته میشود معرفت المذاهب نام کردم ..."', 'Title from rubricated heading at opening on p.7.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of the work on various Islamic sects by Maḥmūd Ṭāhir Ghazāli known as Niẓām-i Mudarris (fl. 14th cent. ?). Table of contents (فهرست) at opening (p.6). Contributions to the cataloguing from Ali Rafi.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 823', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; hand, paper, etc. may suggest 14th or 15th century.', "Binding: Unbound fragment ; recycled paper with scratch notes in pencil (appear to be bookseller's accounts) serves as a wrapper ; only one bifolium is intact ; once sewn in two stations, threads lost ; tears, staining, etc. ; housed in stiff cardboard wrapper in envelope.", 'Support: non-European (Persian or Arab) laid paper with thick, even and fairly distinct laid lines (5-6 per cm. or 20 in 37 mm., horizontal) and what appear to be single chain lines, curved and spaced 39-41 mm. apart.', 'Decoration: Section headings and keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of three inverted commas in red ; astronomical diagrams in red and black (see pp.6, 8, 9, 10, 11).', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, compact hand in a medium line ; mainly serifless (though irregular left-sloping head-serifs appear on occasional lām, alif, etc.) with slight effect of tilt to the left, freely ligatured and quite rounded with curvilinear descenders, closed and open counters, kāf mashqūqah (mashkūlah) preferred with left-ward hook often on shaft and shaqq meeting just below forming an irregular v-shape, pointing very casual though typically in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in as many as 30 lines per page, varying according to appearance of diagrams.', 'Collation: Five leaves, the final four of which appear to constitute the center portion of a gathering (possibly a quaternion) ; only one bifolium is intact ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes paper wrapper).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. fragment.', "Fragment from what appears to be a fine copy of Naṣīr al-Dīn Ṭūsī's (d.1274) Risālah-i Muʻīnīyah or al-Mufīd dar hayʼat, an astronomical work dedicated to Abū al-Shams Muʻīn al-Dīn, son of the author's patron Nāṣir al-Dīn Muḥtasham, governor of Quhistān. Only the latter portion of the second maqālah and opening of the third maqālah are present, including a portion of bāb 4 and bāb 5 (possibly from the second maqālah), the final part of bāb 8 through bāb 14 of the second maqālah, and the opening lines of bāb 1 from the third maqālah."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 262', 'Origin: As appears in authorial colophon on p.116, composed in Istanbul, near the türbe of Ebu Eyyûb el-Ensarî (Abū Ayyūb al-Anṣārī) in Eyüp [in the tekke established by the author], Rabīʻ al-Ākhir 1165 [February-March 1752]. Transcription of this copy likely just after. Paper certainly suggests 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "322 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf (p.2).', 'Binding: Thick boards covered in painted lacquerwork, spine in black leather (overlapping flanges) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in painted lacquerwork (swirling floral composition in bronze on a dark green to black ground) with doublure hinges in decorative paper (dark blue with vegetal design in white) ; upper and lower covers bear paintings of nearly identical floral composition in mirror image to one another on a dark red to black background, namely a central cluster of peonies, poppies, etc. with roses, poppies, buds, and other floral forms all in shades of pink and white with leaves in various shades of green ; sewn in light red thread, two stations, sewing loose ; worked chevron endbands in magenta and cream, damaged ; overall in somewhat poor condition with some abrasion, crazing, cracking and losses to lacquerwork, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 25-26 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of crown above grapes (raisin, see p.12, 18, etc.) ; sturdy, well-sized and burnished to glossy, beige in color.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.4, consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying the title and author in red "رسالۀ حقية للشيخ عبد الله الكاشغرى" flanked by floral accents in pink, red, orange, and gold and surrounded by decorative bands in pink, red, and gold ; rectangular piece surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) filled with swirling vegetal decoration in light blue, pink, red, white, etc. on a field of gold set in well in shades of blue with flanking gold bands ; entire piece surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in red and blue ; written area throughout surrounded by frame consisting of heavy gold band flanked by black fillets with outermost red rule ; keywords and excerpts in Arabic (ḥadīth, etc.) rubricated ; opening textual dividers in the form of gold discs, thereafter textual dividers in the form inverted commas, three inverted commas, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Turkish / Ottoman hand in a medium line ; partially seriffed with occasional right-sloping head-serifs on lām, ṭāʼ, etc., effect of tilt to the left, slight effect of words descending to baseline, dot of final nūn often assimilated with bowl, pointing in distinct or conjoined dots, two dots occasionally written vertically.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 5 V(50), V-2 (58), i ; exclusively quinions (one anomalous) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and skips two pages between pp.55-56).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," triangular, reads: "هزار و صد و شصت و پنج بود تاريخ هجرت نبويه در شهر اسلامبول در قرب حضرت ابي ايوب انصارى در ماه ربيع الاخر نوشته شد و السلام على من اتبع الهدى"', 'Explicit: "تمام حرف را در پرده گفتم درى چند از حقايق بود سفتم الهى خلق كن اقبال تأليف در اطوار حقايق گشت تصنيف بهر طالب مرادش كشف گردد دلش از بحر رحمت نشف گردد نوشتم نام اين شيرين شمائل شود حقيه ما بين رسائل درين ميدان حق از باطل جدا شد ريا و حب جاه اينجا هوا شد دعا از دوستان اميد دارم قلم بشكست رفت از دست كارم "', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله على النعمة الظاهرة والباطنة في جميع الاحوال وعلى الرحمة الواسعة السابقة على القهر والجلال ... وبعد از حمد خدا و درود مصطفى در بيان طريقت نقشبنديه كه طريق اهل السنة و الجماعتست ..."', 'Title from headpiece on at opening on p.4.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the Naqshbandī treatise by ʻAbd Allāh ibn Muḥammad al-Nidāʼī al-Kāshgharī (Abdullah Nidâî-yi Kâşğarî).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 56', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.100, Risālat al-basmalah copied by Muḥammad ibn Memish [Muḥammad] ibn al-Ḥājjī Muḥammad ibn Ḥājjī ʻUthmān-zādah (Mehmet Memiş Osmanzade) with transcription ("qad jaffa al-qalam ʻan taswīd hādhihi al-nuskhah al-sharīfah...") completed roughly 21 Ṣafar 1221 [ca. 10 May 1806] (dating by fractions, reads: "في وقت الظهر من يوم السبت من العشر العاشر من العشر الاول من العشر الثالث من السدس الثاني من النصف الاول من العشر الاول من العشر الثاني من المائة الثالث بعد المائتين والالف من هجرة من له العزة والشرف ..."). As appears in colophon on p.246, transcription of al-Jurjānī\'s Taʻrīfāt completed in Karaman in the year 1116 [1704 or 5]. Paper suggests 18th or early 19th century for bulk of codex.', 'Accompanying materials: Inserts carrying excerpts, notes, etc. (paginated pp.519-520 and pp.547-548).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 101. Treatise on the Bismillah." ; "٦٥٦" on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards (quite thin, semi-limp covers) in black leather, with spine and edges/turn-ins in red-brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in brown leather with blind-tooled design ; upper and lower covers bear blind-tooled design in rosettes and s-shapes evoking central mandorla and cornerpieces ; sewn in lime green thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in lime green and light yellow, only tailband intact ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion, some shrinkage, and minor spine slant (slightly cocked).', "Support: European laid paper of several types ; one type with 10-11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks including three hats and crossbow with 'M A' below ; another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks including bull (trippant or statant guardant), man on a horse over ' C B G,' crown over 'G B T,' coat of arms, etc. ; some leaves only lightly burnished if at all.", 'Decoration: Keywords (often marking sections) and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; some overlining in red ink ; illuminated diagram (namely, dāʼirat ʻAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib) on p.253.', 'Script: Naskh ; mainly a fine Ottoman hand ; mainly serifless ; effect of tilt to the left ; mainly open counters ; some elongation of horizontal strokes ; pointing in lines rather than distinct dots ; descenders mainly curvilinear ; rightward descenders tapered.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 27 V(270), III (276) ; almost exclusively quinions ; numerous leaves left blank ; mainly lacks proper catchwords but last word of final line on the verso of each leaf is usually repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; catchwords present in Taʻrīfāt al-Jurjānī ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts, skips two pages each between pp.47-48, pp.103-104, and pp.449-450, and mistakenly repeats pp.86-87 twice).', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '31. p.545-546 : [blank].', '30. p.537-p.544 : [excerpts].', '29. p.534-p.536 : [blank].', '28. p.531-p.533 : [excerpts].', '27. p.512-p.530 : [blank].', '26. p.510-p.511 : [calculations].', '25. p.506-p.509 : [blank].', '24. p.501-p.505 : [Sharḥ al-amthilah].', '23. p.472-p.500 : [blank].', '22. p.467-p.471 : [masāʼil showing assorted divisions of inheritance].', '21. p.400-p.466 : [blank].', '20. p.391-399 : [contiuation of Sharḥ Ayyuhā al-walad] / Muḥammad ibn Muṣṭafá al-Khādimī.', '19. p.390 : [excerpts].', '18. p.389 : [blank].', '17. p.381-p.388 : [Sharḥ Ayyuhā al-walad] / Muḥammad ibn Muṣṭafá al-Khādimī.', '16. p.380 : [blank].', '15. p.379 : [excerpts].', '14. p.254-p.378 : [blank].', '13. p.249-p.253 : [Sharḥ Jannat al-asmāʼ].', '12. p.247-p.248 : [Risalat tartīb al-istiʻārah].', '11. p.113-246 : [Kitāb al-Taʻrīfāt] / al-Jurjānī.', '10. p.111-p.112 : [blank].', '9. p.109-p.110 : [Risālah fī bayān muqaddimāt al-ʻulūm].', '8. p.101-p.108 : [blank].', '7. p.47-p.100 : [Risālat al-basmalah] / Muḥammad ibn Muṣṭafá al-Khādimī.', '6. p.46 : [blank].', '5. p.45 : [excerpts].', '4. p.28-p.44 : [blank].', '3. p.21-p.27 : [various excerpts, partially blank].', '2. p.10-p.20 : [blank].', '1. p.1-p.9 : [contents listing and various excerpts, partially blank].', 'Collective volume (majmūʻah / mecmua) with a clear copy of Risālat al-basmalah, or Khazāʼin al-jawāhir wa-makhāzin al-zawāhir, by Muḥammad ibn Muṣṭafá al-Khādimī (d.1762), accompanied by a few other mainly Sufi texts and assorted excerpts, with many leaves of the codex left blank.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Crown surmounted by 6-pointed star and crescent. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), no. 1132.', 'Contains geometrical diagrams.', 'Text lightly rubricated, has overlining in red; marginal notes and corrections in hand of copyist.', 'Text (not this copy) published.', '"A treatise on the use of the Indian circle (a geometrical construction for determining the meridian), compiled in 1006 H [1597]." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 161.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 915', "Origin: As appears in colophon on p.52, transcription of Risālat al-Mashāʻir completed in Ramaḍān 1354, corresponding to December 1935. Date at close of al-Ṭūṣī's Risālah fī ḥaqīqat al-ʻilm wa-al-ʻālim wa-al-maʻlūm likely transcribed verbatim from the exemplar. As appears in colophon on p.111, transcription of al-ʻArshīyah completed 28 Ramaḍān 1354, corresponding to 24 December 1935. Opening works possibly transcribed directly from an 1897 Tehran lithographed edition (a Majmūʻah with complete contents listed at close on p.210, see Princeton Near East Collections B753.M83 M374 1897 and compare text of Muqaddimat Sharḥ al-ʻArshīyah, p.110). Other works likely transcribed around the same time. All likely transcribed in Egypt by the same copyist. Bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).", 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 64', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "رسالة المشاعر | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact, modern hand in a medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 26-27 lines per page.', 'Collation: Pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization ; occasional repetition of final word on verso on recto of following leaf.', 'Colophon: [Risālat al-Mashāʻir] "Scribal," reads "تم بعون الملك الودود الذي هو مفيض الخير والعلم والجود في شهر جمادى الآخرة عام الف وثلثمائة وخمس عشر وقد [...؟] مع تعليقاتنا عليه في شهر رمضان من شهور سنة ١٣٥٤ هجرية الموافق لشهر ديسبر من شهور سنة ١٩٣٥ ميلادية على نبينا وعلى روح الله وكلمته وعلى جميع النبيين والمرسلين الف صلاة وتسليم وتحية و ... ختم ووصية ..." ; [al-ʻArshīyah] "Scribal," reads "تم في يوم الثلاثاء الثامن والعشرين من رمضان ١٣٥٤ هحرية الموافق للرابع والعشرين من ديسمبر ١٩٣٥ ميلادية ..."', 'Incipit: [Risālat al-Mashāʻir] "نحمد الله ونستعين بقوته التي اقام بها ملكوت الارض والسموات العلى وبكلمته التي انشأ بها نشأتي الاخرة والاولى على تهذيب القوى القابلة للاستكمال ... اما بعد فيقول اقل الخلائق قدرا وجرما واكثرهم خطئا وجرما محمد المشتهر بصدر الدين يقول ايها الاخوان السالكون الى الله بنور العرفان ..." ; [ Risālah fī ḥaqīqat al-ʻilm] "هذه رسالة في حقيقة العلم والعالم والمعلوم للعلامة ... نصير الدين ... الطوسي قدس الله سره وضعها ليوضح فيها حقيقة العلم اللدني والكسبي باسمك اللهم وبحمدك اعلم وفقنا الله واياك ان لا بد من معرفة العلم والعالم والمعلوم ..." [Muqaddimat Sharḥ al-ʻArshīyah] "الحمد لله وزان علمه وكفى والصلاة على عباده الذين اصطفى وبعد فان الرسالة الموسومة بالعرشية ..." ; [al-ʻArshīyah] "الحمد لله الذي جعلنا ممن شرح صدره للاسلام فهو على نور من ربه ..." ; [Sharḥ al-ʻArshīyah] "قال المصنف قدس سره بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الحمد لله قال الشارح العريف اما للجنس او الاستغراق ويحتمل العهد الحضوري والذهني ايضا ..." ; [Asrār al-āyāt ] "هذا كتاب اسرار الايات لامام المتألهين ... نحمدك اللهم يا من تحيرت في بيداء كبريائه الالباب ..." ; [Sharḥ Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam] "من شرح الاستاذ الفاضل ... عبد الرزاق القاشاني ... الحمد لله الاحد بذاته وكبريائه الواحد بصفاته واسمائه ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.3) and incipit page (p.4).", 'Ms. codex.', '7. p.449-p. 720 : [Sharḥ Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam] / ʻAbd al-Razzāq al-Qāshānī.', '6. p.280-p.448 : Hādhā Kitāb Asrār al-āyāt / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Shīrāzī.', '5. p.112-p.280 : [Sharḥ al-Risālah al-mawsūmah bi-al-ʻArshīyah] / Muḥammad Ismāʻīl ibn al-Sumayʻ al-Iṣfahānī.', '4. p.59-p.111 : Hādhihi al-Risālah al-musammāh bi-al-ʻArshīyah / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī.', '3. p.57-p.59 : [Muqaddimat Sharḥ al-ʻArshīyah].', '2. p.52-p.57 : Hādhihi Risālah fī ḥaqīqat al-ʻilm wa-al-ʻālim wa-al-maʻlūm / Naṣīr al-Dīn al-Ṭūṣī.', '1. p.1-p.52 : Risālat al-Mashāʻir / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī.', "Careful copy of a collection of works (majmūʻah) opening with Kitāb al-Mashāʻir, the work on ontology by Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī (d.1641), renowned philosopher of the Ṣafavid period, followed by a work on mystical knowledge by Naṣīr al-Dīn al-Ṭūṣī (d.1274), followed by an introduction to the commentary by Muḥammad Ismāʻīl ibn al-Sumayʻ al-Iṣfahānī (d.1860 or 61) on al-Ḥikmah al-ʻarshīyah, the popular work on knowledge of God and eschatology also by Mullā Ṣadrā, followed by al-ʻArshīyah itself with an internal commentary (possibly authored by the copyist), followed by the text of the commentary, followed by Mullā Ṣadrā's Asrār al-āyāt, and concluding with an incomplete transcript of the commentary by ʻAbd al-Razzāq al-Qāshānī (d.1330?) on Ibn ʻArabī’s Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 907', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.49, transcription of opening work completed 1 Rabīʻ II 1356 corresponding to 10 June 1937.', 'Accompanying materials: " a. Slip of paper: 7946 b. Slip of paper: 14365" - from handlist prepared by R. Dougherty, 1993.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 56', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title, author and owner, as well as decorative accents over raised bands "رسالة المشاعر | الشيرازي | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine but appears to be over cords, in white thread, five stations ; stuck-on endbands ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, modern hand, in a medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 26 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 12 II(48), I (50), i [?] ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تم بعون الملك الودود الذي هو مفيض الخير والوجود في يوم الخميس غرة ربيع الثاني ١٣٥٦ ١٠ من يونيو ١٩٣٧"', 'Explicit: [Risālat al-Mashāʻir] "ثم النبات من صفوها ثم الحيوان ثم الانسان فاذا استكمل بالعلم والعمل والكمال بلغ درجة العقل الفعال فيه وقف تركيب الخير والجود واتصل اوله آخر درجات الوجود" ; [al-ʻArshīyah] "قاعدة في الحقيقة الالهية التي اظهرت الجنة ... ولها مظاهر كلية وجزئية هي طبقات جهنم ... شجرة الزقوم طعام الاثيم طلعها كأنه رؤوس الشياطين"', 'Incipit: [Risālat al-Mashāʻir] "هذه هي الرسالة المعروفة بالمشاعر للحكيم الكامل ... مولانا صدر الملة والدين محمد الشيرازي نور الله مرقده ... نحمد الله ونستعين بقوته التي اقام بها ملكوت الارض والسماء وبكلمته الغراء التي انشأ بها نشأتي الاولي والاخرة البيضاء على تهذيب القوى الكاملة القابلة للاستكمال ...وبعد فيقول اقل الخلائق قدرا وجرما واكثرهم خطئا وجرما محمد المشتهر بصدر الدين يقول ايها الاخوان السالكون الى الله بنور العرفان ..." ; [al-ʻArshīyah] "الحمد لله الذي جعلنا ممن شرح صدره للاسلام فهو على نور من ربه ... وبعد فيقول العبد الذليل المحتاج الى عفو ربه الجليل المدعو بصدر الدين ... هذه رسالة اذكر فيها طائفة من المسائل الربوبية ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on 'title page' (p.1) and heading at opening of second work (p.49).", 'Ms. codex.', '2. p.49-p.100 : Hādhihi hiya al-Risālah al-mawsūmah bi-al-ʻArshīyah / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī.', '1. p.1-p.49 : Risālat al-Mashāʻir / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī.', 'Careful copy of two works by the renowned Ṣafavid philosopher Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī (d.1641), first Kitāb al-Mashāʻir, on ontology, followed by al-Ḥikmah al-ʻarshīyah, the popular work on knowledge of God and eschatology, apparently incomplete.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 936', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 85', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "رسالة المشاعر | الشيرازي | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; compact hand in a medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with slight effect of tilt to the right, mainly closed counters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 26 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 2 V(20), II (24), i (as suggested by quire numbering, sewing difficult to examine) ; two quinions followed by a binion ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals accompanied by letter kāf (ك) appearing on the opening recto of each gathering from the second (see pp.21, 41) ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "ولا نسيان وذلك فضل الله يؤتيه من يشاء والله ذو الفضل العظيم والمن الجليل وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل نعم المولى ونعم النصير تمت الرسالة بعون صاحب الرفعة والعظمة والجلالة والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "نفتتح جدنا ونعوذ بعفوه من عقابه ... الرسالة الصدرية نحمد الله ونستعين بقوته التي اقام بها ملكوت الارض والسماء وبكلمته التي انشأ بها نشأتي الاولى والآخرة البداية والانتهاء على تهذيب القوى القابلة للاستكمال ... وبعد فاقل الخلائق قدرا وجرما واكثرهم خطأ وجرما محمد المشتهر بصدر الدين يقول ايها الاخوان السالكون الى الله بنور العرفان ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1) and heading at opening on p.2.", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of Kitāb al-Mashāʻir, the work on ontology by Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī (d.1641), renowned philosopher of the Ṣafavid period, followed by a brief treatise attributed to Naṣīr al-Dīn al-Ṭūṣī (d.1274), Risālah fī māhīyat al-ʻilm wa-al-ʻālim wa-al-maʻlūm (see pp.46-47).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 558', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.645, transcription completed 7 Rajab 1124 [ca. 10 August 1712].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- c. Two inserts carrying notes (paginated pp.281-82 and pp.633-34).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and fore edge flap, "IL 133" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped central mandorla filled with vegetal composition (compare Déroche class. OAi) ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn in dull pink or light brown thread, two stations ; endbands virtually gone, though traces of headband remain ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), watermarks including three crescents (81 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.12, 17, etc.) and crown-star-crescent (76 mm. tall, see p.10, 19, etc.), and countermark of "V G" under trefoil (see p.12) ; light cream in color, sturdy and well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; overlining in red ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh ; mainly a fine, compact Turkish hand ; partially but irregularly serifed with right-sloping head-serifs on free-standing alif and other ascender letters, effect of tilt to the left, occasional effect of words descending to baseline, curvilinear descenders with some sweeping, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, freely ligatured with assimilation of initial alif with following lām, dot of final nūn with bowl, etc. ; hand changes at p.629, from there to p.649 text supplied in a nastaʻlīq (talik), sans serif with effect of tilt to the right ; final two leaves of the text in still a different naskh ; opening excerpt in a naskh with some influence of nastaʻlīq (talik), a clear Turkish hand, virtually serifless with effect of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated) and tilt to the left, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, freely ligatured.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 21 lines per page ; opening excerpt in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: I (2), 32 V(322), I (324) ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes some inserts and mistakenly skips ahead from p.275 to p.277 and from p.277 to p.279).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "سوده [الحرف الاخير مشطوب] الحقير [كذا] هذه الاوراق في سنة اربع وعشرين ومائة والف السبع في شهر رجب المرجب في نصفه يوم پنجشنبه قرب غروب الشمس"', 'Explicit: "وان لم يمتد اعتقاله او لم يعلم اشاراته لم يكن حكمه حكم الاخرين فلا يعتبر اشارته و كتابته تم الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي شرح صدر الشريعة الغراء ... وبعد فان تكميل النفوس الانسانية بالفضائل القدسية و تحليتها بالخصائل الانسية... فشرعت فيها ثانيا بعد ايابي من تلك الاراضي المقدسة ... وسميتها بذخيرة العقبى في شرح صدر الشريعة العظمى..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.12.', 'Ms. codex.', '7. p.653-p.654 : [blank].', '6. p.652 : [listing of notabilia].', '5. p.650-p.651 : [authorial colophon].', '4. p.649 : [excerpt].', '3. p.646-p.648 : [table of contents].', '2. p.9-p.645 : Dhakhīrat al-ʻuqbá fī sharḥ Ṣadr al-Sharīʻah al-ʻUẓmah / Akhī Chalabī.', '1. p.1-p.8 : [gloss upon a commentary on Sūrat al-Qadr].', 'Fine copy of the gloss by Yūsuf ibn Junayd Akhī Chelebī (Ahi Çelebî) on Sharḥ al-Wiqāyah by Ṣadr al-Sharīʻah al-Aṣghar (al-Thānī) ʻUbayd Allāh ibn Masʻūd al-Maḥbūbī, itself a commentary on Wiqāyat al-riwāyah fī masāʼil al-Hidāyah by Maḥmūd ibn Ṣadr al-Sharīʻah al-Maḥbūbī, an epitome on the celebrated work of Ḥanafī fiqh, al-Hidāyah by ʻAlī ibn Abī Bakr al-Marghīnānī. (see Isl. Ms. 86 and Isl. Ms. 97 for other ms. copies of this work). Preceded by an excerpt of a gloss upon a commentary on Sūrat al-Qadr (pp.1-8) and followed by table of contents (pp.646-648), closing excerpt (p.649), and authorial colophon in different hand (pp.650-651).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 992', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 141', 'Binding: Boards covered in black textured cloth ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a geometric pattern (resembling a scale pattern) in olive green or dull gold ; cover gold-stamped with "رسالة المولى رسلان حقيقة التوحيد" ; sewn in white thread over two recessed cords ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Wove paper.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a medium to bold line (ink and line thickness changes, black to grey-blue, though appears to be same hand) ; serifless and freely ligatured with effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed ; some passages in a large, fine naskh.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 9-11 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 5 IV(40), i ; possible quire number on p.80 (suggesting that gatherings are not in original order) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "وما جعل عليكم في الدين من جرح ملة ابيكم ابراهيم هو سماكم المسلمين من قبل"', 'Incipit: "قال العارف بالله المولى رسلان في رسالة وضعها لبيان خلاصة التوحيد ما نصه كلك شرك خفي قال بعض الشراح كلك اي نفسك وا حوت وما اليها انتسب شرك خفي اي اثبات للغير منشاؤه الوهم والخيال ..."', "Title from inscriptions on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of what appears to be excerpts from the treatise by al-Shaykh Raslān, Arslān ibn Yaʻqūb al-Jaʻbarī (d.1300) on divine oneness, with some commentary.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 665', 'Origin: As appears in authorial colophon on p.6, composition [or transcription? if not certainly fairly contemporary] of opening work completed 6 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1172 [?] [ca. 31 July 1759 ?]. As appears in colophon on p.135, final work copied by Muḥammad ibn al-Sayyid Abī Bakr al-shahīr bi-Ibn al-Miʻmārī with transcription completed 23 Jumādá I 1172 [ca. 22 January 1759].', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 146" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in shell marbled paper (in brown, red, and dark blue) with red leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted wove paper ; sewn in white and dark blue thread, four stations ; worked chevron endbands in cream and dark blue, now quite dingy but in fairly good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of paper and leather, minor delamination of boards, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of at least two main types ; one type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22 mm. apart (horizontal), and grapes (raisin) under crown watermark (see p.6, 7, etc.) ; another type with 11-12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 24-25 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of double-headed eagle (see p.18, 20, 30, 32, etc.) and names (see p.24, 25), dark cream to beige in color, thin though dense and sturdy, well-burnished ; some ink burn.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated (or bolded and accented with red ink, as in the opening works) ; textual dividers in the form of red discs and three inverted commas ; written area of final work surrounded by red rule-border.', "Script: Naskh ; two elegant 'Syrian' or Egyptian hands ; hand supplying opening two works neat and compact, partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on various ascenders (even occasional free-standing alif), marked effect of tilt to the left, rounded with curvilinear descenders, somewhat carelessly pointed in strokes or distinct dots, tāʼ marbūṭah very often unpointed, some free assimilation of letters ; hand supplying final work another fine hand, virtually serifless with effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders (some sweeping), pointing in conjoined dots or strokes.", 'Layout: Written in 19 and 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: III+1 (7), 5 V(57), VI (69) ; chiefly quinions ; pagination in pencil, Hindu-Arabic numerals, appears on recto of each leaf only (final work) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: [al-Qawlah al-kāfiyah] "Authorial," triangular, reads: "تمت ست في ذي الحجة سنة اثنين وسبعين ومائة والف [؟] ... تم" ; [Badāʼiʻ al-zuhūr] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "وكان الفراغ من كتابة هذا الجزء الاول من بدائع الزهور في وقائع الدهور بعد ظهر نهار الاثنين المبارك ثالث عشرين جمادى الاولى الذي هو من شهور سنة ١١٧٢ اثنين وسبعين ومائة والف من هجرة من له العز والشرف عليه افضل الصلاة والسلام على يد الفقير الى مولاه الباري محمد ابن السيد ابي بكر الشهير بابن المعماري لطف الله به وجعله من خربه امين امين امين"', 'Incipit: [al-Qawlah al-kāfiyah] "الحمد لله الذي رفع اهل الاثر في البدو والحضر ... وبعد فيقول محمد بن محمد المغربي الازهري غفر الله ذنوبه وستر قد سئلت عن حديث اشهر مضمونه ان انطاكيه وبعض البلدان من مدن النار ذات الشرر فاجبت بانه موضوع مفتري منكر ثم بعد يومين جاني بعض الاخوان اهل الود المدخر بذلك الحديث المشتهر فعلقت هذه التعليقة المزرية بعقد الدرر ولقبتها القولة الكافية فيما ورد في انطاكيه ..." ; [Taḥdhīr aʻlām al-bashar] "الحمد لله الذي حما حمى السنة المحمدية بأئمة جهابذة نقاد ... اما بعد فيقول فقير مولاه الغني محمد بن محمد المغربي الازهري منح فتح الجواد لما وردنا موارد حلب الغدية الاوراد سنة اثنين وسبعين ومائة والف لازاحة ما على القلب من الانكاد ... ورد علينا سؤال حديثي مضمونه ... بفضل عكا الشهيرة عن التعريف بين الحاضر والباد فكتبت عليه بانه موضوع وكل ما اورد فيها وفي عينها وهو مفتري عند علماء الاسناد ... وسميت الرقيم تحذير اعلام البشر من احاديث عكا وعينها المسمات بعين البقر ..." ; [Badāʼiʻ al-zuhūr] "وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم قال مؤلفه في ذكر قصة النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم يقول الله تعالى في محكم كتابه العزيز ما كان محمد ابا احد من رجالكم ولكن رسول الله وخاتم النبيين ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from opening 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. composite codex.', '4. p.136-p.138 : [blank].', '3. p.16-p.135 : al-Juzʼ al-awwal min Badāʼiʻ al-zuhūr fī waqāʼiʻ al-duhūr / al-Suyūṭī [?].', '2. p.6-p.14 : Taḥdhīr aʻlām al-bashar min aḥādīth ʻAkkā wa-ʻaynihā al-musammāh bi-ʻAyn al-Baqar / Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Maghribī al-Azharī al-Tāfīlātī.', '1. p.2-p.6 : Risālat al-Qawlah al-kāfiyah fīmā warada fī Anṭākiyah / Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Maghribī al-Azharī al-Tāfīlātī.', 'Fine composite manuscript opening with two works attributed to Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Maghribī al-Azharī al-Tāfīlātī (d.1777) in which he exposes the spurious nature of two circulating ḥadīth on Antioch (Anṭākīyah) and other supposedly condemned cities and Acre (ʻAkkā) and its spring, followed by the first part of a work of uncertain attribution (possibly of al-Suyūṭī ?) entitled Badāʼiʻ al-zuhūr fī waqāʼiʻ al-duhūr, addressing the Prophet, his lineage, family, special qualities, etc.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 353', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.4b and fol.12b, executed by Muḥammad ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad Ḥusayn al-Tabrīzī. Date of transcription not specified, decoration, etc. would suggest 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "459 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in mahogany leather ; Type III binding (without flap) but covers not flush with text block ; pastedowns and flyleaves in orange surface-dyed, coated paper ; upper and lower covers carry central gold-tooled interlace ornament with central knot evoking a diamond shape as well as tooled and stamped borders in gold ; sewn in red thread, four stations ; overall in fairly good condition with only minor abrasion though cover fully detached with hinges (via attachment at pastedown) split.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal and vertical, curved and fairly distinct though cloudy formation) and no chain lines visible, thin and crisp though sturdy, heavily sized and burnished, beige in color ; flyleaves in surface-dyed wove paper.', "Decoration: Superb illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on fol.1b consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by vegetal accents in blue (cobalt) and red on a gold ground bordered in bands of gold and lime green, surmounted by tall, scalloped w-shaped piece with swirling floral vegetal decoration on grounds of cobalt and gold itself set in a well gold and red bands and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and red ; a second splendid illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) appears at opening of the Risālah on fol.5b consisting of large rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying the basmalah in white surrounded by floral motifs in gold, mauve, turquoise, light blue, etc. on a cobalt ground and bordered in a narrow red band and heavy band of gold interlace, surmounted by vertically elongated dome (or hasp) set in rectangular band filled with swirling floral vegetal decoration in gold, mauve, red, light blue, turquoise, etc. on a cobalt ground with gold accents, bordered in gold and red bands and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; illuminated tailpiece at close on fol.12b consisting of triangular pieces flanking 'colophon' text ; written area throughout surrounded by a frame consisting of heavy gold band flanked by narrower gold bands with outermost blue and red rules ; textual dividers in the form of illuminated rosettes with red and blue accents ; floral designs in gold set off written area.", 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant hand in a medium line ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing in conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, II (4), IV (12), i ; catchwords present.', 'Colophon: [close of opening dedication, fol.4b] "Scribal," reads "كتبه العبد المذنب محمد على بن محمد حسين التبريزى غفر الله لهما"', 'Dedication: Composed for the sultan named on fol.2b, "السلطان ابن السلطان السلطان الغازى سلطان خليل [بن؟] محمد خان خلد الله ظلال خلافته ..." ; despite addition of "بن" likely Mehmet III (r.1595-1603).', 'Explicit: [Risālat al-taṣavvuf] "و درجۀ سعادت رسى آمين الحمد لله رب العالمين اثر كلك محمد على"', 'Incipit: [Risālat al-taṣavvuf] "حمدی که نهایت شایستگی منزه از شایبۀ یقین و تخصیص آمده ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (fol.5a).", 'Ms. codex.', '2. fol.5a-fol.12b : Risālat al-taṣavvuf / ʻUrfī Shīrāzī.', '1. fol.1b-fol.4b : [lengthy dedication comprised mainly of prayers].', 'Elegant copy of a brief Ṣūfī treatise by ʻUrfī Shīrāzī preceded by a lengthy dedication with prayers for the reigning sultan, possibly Mehmet III (r.1595-1603) or his successor (see fol.2b).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 118', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.64 and p.190, both works copied by ʻUmar ibn Aḥmad ibn Shāhīn in Erzurum. Transcription of first work finished Rabīʻ II 1127 [April-May 1715]. Transcription of second work finished final days of Jumādá II 1127 [July 1715].', 'Accompanying materials: Slip with notes (paginated pp.65-66).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 78. Khulasat al-hisab."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in paper (once pink with floral pattern in gold, see envelope flap) with spine, fore-edge flap, and edges/turn-ins in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; sewn in cream thread, two stations, though sewing is very often missing ; overall in quite poor condition with significant losses of paper on upper and lower cover, significant abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, etc. ; repairs in assorted leathers.', 'Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), three hats watermark ; tearing and staining.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, abbreviations, and numerals rubricated ; written area (including ruled margins) through p.20 surrounded by red rule-border ; textual divders in red ; many geometric diagrams in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; bold Turkish hand ; mainly serifless ; slight effect of tilt to the left ; mainly closed counters ; kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred ; descenders mainly tapered ; final nūn occasionally reversed (or re-curved) ; opening quire (through p.20) in a very similar but larger hand with more open counters.', 'Layout: Written in 13 and 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 2 V(20), VI (32), 5 V(82), VI (94) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present in second work ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert).', 'Colophon: [Khulāṣat al-ḥisāb] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت الرسالة بعون الله الملك المنان سنة ۱۱۲۷ على يد الضعيف عمر بن احمد بن شاهين في سنة سبع وعشرين ومائة والف في ربيع الاخير في يوم الثلثاء في بلدة ارض روم في محلة المفتي" ; [Sharḥ Khulāṣat al-ḥisāb] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت الرسالة الشريفة بعون الملك المعين العطية فيما بين الفجر والضحى في يوم الثلثاء من ايام اواخر جمادى الاخير على يد المذنب المحتاج الى ربه الغني عمر بن احمد بن شاهين غفر له ولوالديها في المدينة المسماة بالارزن الروم سنة ۱۱۲۷"', 'Explicit: [Khulāṣat al-ḥisāb] "فاحفظ وصيتي اليك والله حفيظ عليك" ; [Sharḥ Khulāṣat al-ḥisāb] "فمجموع الرمح اثنى عشرة ذراعا ونصف وهو المطلوب"', 'Incipit: [Khulāṣat al-ḥisāb] "نحمدك يا من لا يحيط بجميع نعمه عدد ... وبعد فهذه رسالة في الحساب مرتبة على مقدمة وعشرة ابواب" [p.1] "نحمدك يا من لا يحيط بجميع نعمه عدد ... وبعد فان الفقير الى الله الغني بهاء الدين محمد بن الحسين العاملي ... يقول ان علم الحساب لا يخفي علو شانه وسمو مكانه ... وهذه رسالة حوت الاهم من اصوله ... وهي خلاصة كتاب المتقدمين ... سميتها خلاصة الحساب ورتبتها على مقدمة وعشرة ابواب" ; [Sharḥ Khulāṣat al-ḥisāb] "يا من عجز عن جميع تضاعف نعمه اقلام افهام العقلاء ... اما بعد فيقول الفقير الى الله الغني عمر بن احمد الشهير بالمائي الچلي رسمت فيما مضى في ايام التحصيل واثناء التدريس والتعطيل تعليقات على المواضع المشكلة وتنبيهات على رموز المباحث المفصلة في الرسالة البهائية في الحساب المشهور فيما بين اولى الالباب ..."', 'Title supplied by catloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '3. p.68-p.190 : [Sharḥ al-Risālah al-Bahāʼīyah fī al-ḥisāb] / ʻUmar ibn Aḥmad al-Māʼī al-Chillī.', '2. p.67 : [blank].', '1. p.1-p.64 : Khulāṣat al-ḥisāb / Bahāʼ al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Ḥusayn al-ʻĀmilī.', "Fine copy of the manual of arithmetic Bahāʼ al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Ḥusayn al-ʻĀmilī (d.1621), followed by commentary by ʻUmar ibn Aḥmad al-Māʼī al-Chillī (fl. 17th cent.). Copyist has transcribed what appears to be the opening of another ms. copy of Khulāṣat al-ḥisāb on the 'title page' (p.1)."])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Crown with roman lettering(?).', 'Contains tables.', 'In Maghribī script.', 'Text and tables rubricated and enclosed within red borders; marginal corrections in hand of copyist.', 'For other copies of this text see Mich. Isl. Mss. 708 and 799,4.', 'Nubdhah fī maʻrifat waḍʻ rubʻ al-muqanṭarāt, pp. [222-231].', 'handasīyah, pp. [76-104]; [6] Muqaddimah mukhtaṣirah fī ʻilm al-mīqāt, pp. [106-117]; [7] Muḥammad ibn Abī al-Khayr al-Ḥusnī, Rāḥat al-fuʾād, pp. [120-161]; [8] Badr al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad Sibṭ al-Māridīnī, Jadāwil fī rasm al-munḥarifāt, pp. [163-197]; [9] Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Abī al-Fatḥ al-Ṣūfū al-Miṣrī, Nuzhat al-nāẓir fī waḍʻ khuṭūṭ faḍl al-dāʾir, pp. [202-210]; [10] Hidāyat al-ḥāʾir ilá maʻrifat waḍʻ faḍl al-dāʾir, pp. [210-220]; [11]', 'bi-al-ṭarīq al-', 'Pp. [1-18]. Bound with: [2] ʻIzz al-Dīn ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz ibn Muḥammad al-Wafāʾī, Zahr al-qaṭāʾif fī maʻrifat istikhrāj al-inḥirāf, pp. [20-37]; [3] ʻAlī al-Malāqī al-Andalusī, al-Waḍʻ ʻalá al-jihāt fī al-basāʾiṭ wa-al-munḥarifāt, pp. [40-51]; [4] Shihāb al-Dīn Abū al-ʻAbbās Aḥmad ibn Rajab al-Qāhirī ibn al-Majdī, Zād al-musāfir li-maʻrifat rasm faḍl al-dāʾir, pp. [52-74]; [5] Muḥammad ibn ʻAlī al-Shabrāmallisī, al-Durrah al-bahīyah fī waḍʻ basāʾiṭ faḍl al-dāʾir', '"Abridgement by the author" of "Irshād al-ḥāʾir ... a treatise on sundial theory with tables for latitude 30⁰, Cairo." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 73.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 879', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.105, copied [and authored ?] by Jaʻfar ibn Ḥājjī Muḥammad Ḥusayn al-Qummī with transcription completed in Tehran 6 Rabīʻ II 1296 [ca. 30 March 1879], presumably on the order of Nāṣir al-Dīn Shāh Qajār (r.1848-1896) "حسب الامر وفرمايش جناب مستطاب سرور مكرم مخدوم و معظم" (see closing matter on p.105).', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with description in hand of G. Meredith-Owens "MO 14 A manual of Persian and Turkish conversation in 4 bāb. Copied in Tehran in 1296" (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Portion of a page torn from Luzac catalog, 1911, with description of this manuscript "2546 Persian-Turkish conversations. A ms. containing conversational phrases in Persian and Turkish in parallel columns. Neatly written, the Persian in Nīm-Shikastah, the Turkish in Naskhī. 8vo. Leather-binding. pp. 93. Written at Teheran, A.H. 1296." as well as penciled note (likely in hand of E. Husselman "n. f. in Mich. Isl. MSS." (paginated pp.3-4) -- c. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Meredith-Owens notes | 19th century [in hand of Emilie Savage-Smith ?]" (paginated pp.5-6) -- d. Slip with note "Counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" (paginated pp.7-8).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 28', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in light orange-brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in purple-tinted paper ; upper and lower covers in blind-tooled in mitred-panel style ; sewn in cream thread, six stations ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support:European "laid" paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 23 mm. apart (vertical) and watermark "A PIRIE & SONS 1877" (see p.12, 22-23, etc.) ; embossed with medallion carrying the Lion and Sun emblem of the Iranian state (officially adopted by Muḥammad Shāh Qajār in 1836).', 'Script: Naskh and shikastah-nastaʻlīq ; a compact, elegant hand ; Persian text in shikastah-nastaʻlīq, compact and freely ligatured with effect of words descending to baseline, pointing in distinct dots, elongation of horizontal strokes and sweeping descenders (many reversed or recurved) ; Turkish text in a fine naskh, mainly serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots, open and close counters, some free assimilation of letters.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 7 lines per page, divided to two columns with Persian in right column and Turkish in left column ; list of vocabulary at close in four columns.', 'Collation: i, 3 VI (36), IV (44), II (48), i ; three senions followed by a quaternion and a binion ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," [and authorial ?] reads "باتمام رسيد در دار الخلافه طهران صانها الله عن الحادثات [؟] بتاريخ يوم يكشنبه ششم شهر ربيع الثانى ١٢٩۶ وانا اقل خلق الله ... جعفر بن حاجى [؟] محمد حسين القمى اللهم اغفرها بحق الحق والنبى المطلق فى سنه ١٢٩۶"', 'Explicit: "يعنى تمام اولدى حسب الامر وفرمايش جناب مستطاب سرور مكرم ومخدوم معظم باتمام رسيد ..."', 'Incipit: "اشبوه رساله تكلم ايچون درت باب اوزره تبويب اولنون ..."', 'Title from opening matter (preface) on p.11.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy (possibly autograph) of a treatise addressing conversational phrases in Persian and Turkish in four chapters witha Turkish preface, parallel Persian-Turkish text, and a brief glossary at the close.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 605', 'Origin: Manuscript lacks dated colophon; however, via F. Bauden\'s analysis it is possible to suggest a dating for the transcription between 818 and 831 [1415 and 1427] with replacements supplied in the 17th century (as paper for those sections suggests). The ms. plainly represents the author\'s fair copy (compare published editions and other ms. copies, e.g. MS Ayasofya 3480 which was plainly copied from this very ms.), which given analysis of its content, was likely begun in 819 (see fol.225a/p.449 where al-Maqrīzī states "والامر على ذلك مستمر الى وقتنا هذا وهو سنة تسع عشرة وثماني مائة" ; it is more likely that this refers to the date at the time the section was copied rather than to a date appearing in the draft being copied, which was certainly completed by 816 - see F. Bauden\'s currently proposed dating for the composition of the Khiṭaṭ in "Maqriziana II" in Mamlûk Studies Review XII, 2008 and "Maqriziana IX" in Mamlûk Studies Review XIV, 2010). Analysis of additions to the fair copy in the margins, at the end of a section or on the inserted slips ("notecards") provide dates that range from 820 to 828. Hence Bauden\'s conclusion that the fair copy was begun in 818-819 [1415-1417] and this volume completed in 828 [1424-25].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL112" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in tan to brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in European paper ; interior and joints of foreedge flap reinforced in red leather ; upper and lower covers bear a blind-stamped mandorla with pendants (compare Déroche class. NSd 1) ; in poor condition; lower endband is entirely gone and upper is nearly gone ; all joints are split to varying degrees ; spine is split through the center along its length ; leather losses on spine have exposed lining ; lower cover is detaching ; numerous stains on covers ; due to fragile state, housed in box for protection ; would benefit greatly from a conservation effort.', 'Support: mainly non-European (Egyptian?) laid paper with laid lines running vertically, 5-6 laidlines per cm. ; chainlines are very difficult to ascertain with any consistency, but in some cases one can discern a set of 3, spaced 9-10mm apart ; other papers also appear (not suprising given the chaotic nature of the gatherings) and thus it is not difficult to imagine that the ms. was assembled from the materials at hand ; all of the inserts ("notecards") appear to be on either the same paper as the main textblock or very similar paper, some tinted (see p.220-A, a small insert of 82 x 82 mm. tinted orange-red) ; several leaves supplied later on European papers, probably early 17th c. with various watermarks (in fol. 1, tres lune -- in fol. 58, crossbow with lever in a circle and cloverleaf, see Piccard 123860-123862 -- in fol. 64, anchor in circle with cloverleaf, very similar to Heawood no. 2 -- in fol. 261, crown with star with crescents, very similar to Heawood nos. 1131-1133) ; al-Maqrīzī often left large spaces and sometimes entire leaves blank, thus the hands of the later contributors sometimes appear on the original paper.', 'Decoration: Illuminated titlepiece on fol.1a (p.1) [supplied later, roughly 17th century] consisting of central medallion in nine concentric circles (red, blue, black, and gold) with rectangular panels above and below, framed in a thick gold band outlined by black fillets ; upper panel carries the title in black ink "الربع الثالث من الخطط للعلامة المقريزي" ; incipit and facing page are framed in gold band outlined by black fillets ; remainder of text (and even inserts) is framed in rule border consisting of two red fillets, a portion of which was apparently supplied after the main text was transcribed and glossed (in many places, gaps have been left to accommodate marginalia, border of fol.180b/p.360 obviously drawn after slip inserted, etc.) ; section headings and keywords rubricated ; occasional overlining [mainly Hand M] in red.', 'Script: Essentially three hands appear ; main hand is that of al-Maqrīzī [Hand M], a very distinctive hand the identification of which was confirmed by Frédéric Bauden (for samples, see Bauden\'s Maqriziana articles, as well as the notice of Dozy for the three volumes of al-Muqaffá), Naskh, sans serif, with mainly closed counters, distinct right-ward slant (more or less apparent throughout) and strong horizontal character (effect of elongation and flattening in comparison with other Mamlūk naskhs) ; idiosyncrasies include: rightward-pointing tails on final yāʼ and alif maqṣūrah which curl back under the word, "قال" with somewhat hook-shaped alif which curls up and over the qāf (supplying the otherwise absent pointing), and "هم" for which the letters are positioned nearly one above the other ; somewhat casually pointed and unvocalized ; appearing next often is the hand supplying the replacements at the opening and at various other places [Hand B, see fol.1a-2b (p.1-4), fol.58a-59b(p.115-118), etc.], Naskh, with lām-alif al-muḥaqqaqah, occasionally seeming to attempt a slight imitation of al-Maqrīzī\'s hand, but without success ; finally, the other replacement hand appearing at the close and various places [Hand C, see fol.95a-95b (p.189-190), fol.261a-262b (p.521-524), etc.], Naskh, quite readable, fully pointed and partially vowelled, with mainly closed counters and kāf mashkūlah preferred.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; single column with numerous large gaps, blank (ruled and un-ruled) pages, and sewn-in slips in the primary hand (i.e. of al-Maqrīzī) ; frame-ruled.', "Collation: i, V+3 (13), III (19), VII (303), 2 V (53), V-1 (62), 2 + [V-1] (73), IV+1 (82), 1+II (87), VII (101), III (107), IV (115), 1+II (120), 2+VI (134), IV (142), VI (154), V+1 (165), IV+1 (174), V (184), VI (196), II+3 (203), V (213), III (219), V+1 (230), III (236), 2+IV (246), V (256), II+2 (262) ; a chaotic set, likely assembled from the material at hand and supplemented by numerous inserts, each of which is numbered by the page preceding it plus '-A' (e.g. '220-A', see p.220/fol.110, p.296/148, p.318/159, p.354/177, p.360/180, p.384/192, p.442/221, p.462/231) ; several leaves left partially or entirely blank, as well as lacuna where date would appear on fol.4a (p.7) ; catchwords present ; run of foliation p.287-403, with اول written out at the beginning and the final number being 56 ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during cataloguing).", 'Explicit:"[fol.260b/p.520]السلطان الملك الصالح ناصر الدين محمد وعمره نحو عشر سنين فقام بامره الامير برسباي الدقماقي ثم جعله بعد اربعة اشهر واربعة ايام السلطان الملك الأشرف سيف الدين أبو النصر برسباي احد مماليك الظاهر برقوق و جلس على تخت الملك في يوم الاربعاء ثامن شهر ربيع الآخر سنة خمس وعشرين وثمانمائة الى اخره. تم بحمد الله. وهذا اخر الثلاثة ارباع بتجزئة المصنف ورأيت على هامش نسخة اخرى بغير خط المصنف ويقول وتوفي الأشرف برسباي ثالث عشر ذي الحجة سنة إحدى واربعين وثمانمائة فكانت مدته ست عشرة سنة وتسعة شهور ثم قام من بعده ولده الملك العزيز يوسف. ويليه الجزء الرابع يبدأ بذكر المساجد ... [fol.261b/p.522] وتولى عوضه الملك الأشرف جانبلاط الأشرفي قايتباي وأتانا خبرة بمنزله الجديدة في العود من المدينة في يوم الجمعة سادس عشري ذي الحجة سنة خمس وتسعمائة فكانت مدته ستة شهور وأياما ثم خلع في يوم السبت ثامن عشرين جمادى الآخرة سنة ست وتسعمائة وتولى الملك العادل طومان باي الأشرفي قايتباي ثم خلع سلخ رمضان من السنة فكانت مدته نحو مائة يوم وتولى بعده الأشرف قانصوه الغوري الأشرفي قايتباي مستهل شوال من السنة المذكورة انتهى ذكر المساجد الجامعة والله اعلم"', 'Incipit: "و صلى الله على سيدنا محمد وآله وصحبه وسلم ذكر حارة القاهرة وظواهرها قال ابن سيدة والحارة كل محلة دنت منازلها قال والحملة منزل القوم وبالقاهرة وظواهرها عدة حارات حارة بهاء الدين هذه الحارة كانت قديما خارج باب الفتوح الذي وضعه القائد جوهر عندما اختط اساس القاهرة من الطوب النيء وقد بقي من هذا الباب عقدة برأس حارة بهاء الدين وصارت هذه الحارة اليوم من داخل باب الفتوح الذي وضعه أمير الجيوش بدر الجمالي وهو الموجود الآن"', 'Title from titlepiece on fol.1a (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Superb holograph of the third part of al-Maqrīzī\'s well-known work on the topography of Cairo and Egyptian history generally, representing the fair copy. Many "notecards" (also in al-Maqrīzī\'s hand) inserted. Detailed examination and description of this ms. provided by Noah Gardiner and Frédéric Bauden.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 458', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.300a, copied by Maḥmūd ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʻAlī ibn ʻAbd al-Karīm. Finished copying in the year 750 [1349 or 1350].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, "IL 57 II" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) though flap and lower cover are now missing ; upper cover carries stamped central mandorla (compare Déroche class. OAi2 7) and pendants ; pastedown of blue laid paper ; pasted label on spine bears former shelfmark ; sewing in light pink thread, four stations and worked chevron endbands in pale pink and blue over red leather core, damaged with only remnants of threads and exposed cores remaining (contribution to cataloguing from Aisha Wahab) ; overall in poor condition with lifting and losses of leather, upper board delaminating, sewing failing, etc ; repair to upper joint across part of spine in brown leather.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper; laid lines running horizontally and spaced roughly 7-8 laid lines per cm; heavy and flocculent with many undissolved fibers.', 'Decoration: Sūrah headings and Qurʼānic text rubricated; ink has faded in several places.', 'Script: Naskh; clear Turkish or Persianate hand in a medium line; mainly sans serif but with occasional serifs on lām of definite article, kāf mashqūqah preferred, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, curvilinear descenders, point of nūn set down within wide bowl (nearly encircled).', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V (10), V+1 (21), 6 V (81), IV+1 (90), 4 V (130), II+1 (135), 5 V (185), V+1 (196), VI (208), IV +1 (217), 8 V (297), I+1 (300); chiefly quinions; catchwords present; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (referenced in cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم الربع الثالث من كتاب الكشاف عن تفسير الكلام الوهاب على يدي اضعف عباد الله جرما ... الراجي عفو ربه الكريم محمود بن عبد الرحمن بن علي بن عبد الكريم حامد الله تعالى ومصليا على نبيه وعلى اله الطيبين في سنة خمسين وسبعمائة والحمد لله اولا واخرا وله الحمد ظاهرا وباطنا والسلام"', 'Explicit: "عن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم من قرى والصافات اعطي من الاجر عشر حسنات بعدد كل جني وشيطان وتباعدت عنه مردة الشيطان ويبرى من الشرك وشهد له حافظاه يوم القيامة انه كان مؤمنا بالمرسلين والحمد لله رب العالمين وهو حسبنا نعم المعين"', 'Incipit: "سورة مريم عليها السلام ثمان وسبعون اية ويروى [؟] تسع وتسعون ايات"', 'Title from colophon on fol.300a.', 'Ms. codex.', "Third part of four from al-Zamakhsharī's celebrated commentary on the Qur'an, beginning with Sūrat Maryam (19) and ending with Sūrat al-Ṣāffāt (37)"])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 454', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.408, original (now opening) section copied by Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad ibn Ḥasan ibn Abī Shāmah al-Ḥanbalī al-Dārānī with transcription completed 21 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 840 [ca. 26 June 1437] in madrasat Shaykh al-Islām Abī ʻUmar in Damascus. As appears in colophon on p.519, transcription of added section completed 29 Ramaḍān 1103 [ca. 14 June 1692].', 'Accompanying materials: Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From front flyleaf and spine label, "IL 344a I" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip in Isl. Ms. 453).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather with red leather repair to spine ; Type III binding (without flap), likely not original to codex (traces of envelope flap suggest original binding was Type II) ; doublures (board linings) in an elegant marbled paper (mainly in pink, dark blue, and lime green) ; upper hinge and repair to lower cover in green textile ; upper and lower covers carry large blind-stamped (with tan leather recessed onlay) mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. NA 6) with gold-painted accents and tooled pendants (a cluster of rosette stamps), as well as tooled and gold-painted border ; sewn in pink thread, two stations, many threads broken ; worked chevron endbands in poor condition, significant losses to headband especially with core exposed ; overall in somewhat poor condition with some abrasion and staining, flap lost, etc. ; repairs in red leather (also damaged) ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: Earlier, original section on non-European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (20 in roughly 25 mm., horizontal), chain lines (four groups of three visible in some bifolia, see pp.132-33 etc.) with 8-11 mm. between chains and 44-46 mm. between groups, dark cream with some inclusions, well-burnished, fairly smooth ; flyleaves, replacement leaves and added section on European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines (vertical) spaced 28 mm. apart, three crescents watermark (see p.414, 96 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, similar to Heawood 866), and "V C" under trefoil countermark (see p.410, 412), creamy, well-burnished, with some staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: In original section, sūrah headings and Qurʼānic text being commented upon rubricated ; in later addition, sūrah headings and keywords introducing Qurʼānic excerpts rubricated, Qurʼānic text overlined in red', 'Script: Naskh and nastaʻlīq (talik) ; opening original section in naskh, an elegant Syrian hand in a thin to medium line, serifless with mainly closed counters, descenders more rectilinear (though final yāʼ more curvilinear and sweeping), extension of horizontal strokes, bowl of final nūn dramatically sweeping, pointing in distinct dots, kāf occasionally without shaqq ; later added section (and replacement leaves, pp.69-76) in nastaʻlīq (talik), elegant Turkish hand in a medium to bold line, serifless with effect of tilt to the right and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page.', 'Collation: ii, IV+1 (9), 19 V(199), I+1 (202), 5 V(252), IV (260) ; chiefly quinions ; inner bifolia of fourth quire (pp.69-76) on replacement leaves supplied with later addition ; catchwords present ; quire numbering in the form of whole words on the upper outer corner of the recto of the opening leaf of each quire in the earlier section only ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and added leaves).', 'Colophon: [original] "وافق الفراغ من نسخه في يوم الثلثاء الحادي والعشرين من شهر ذي حجة الحرام سنة اربعين وثمان مائة على يد الفقير الى رحمة ربه القدير محمد بن محمد بن حسن بن ابي شامه الحنبلي الشهير بالداراني عفا الله عنه وعن والديه وعن من نظر فيه ودعا له ولجميع المسلمين وذلك بمدرسة شيخ الاسلام ابي عمر قدس الله روحه ونور ضريحه" ; [added section] "Scribal," triangular, reads "قد تم الجلد الثاني من تفسير معالم التنزيل للامام البغوي بعون الله عز وجل في اليوم التاسع والعشرين من شهر رمضان لسنة ثلث ومائة بعد الالف الحمد لله رب العالمين ... والحمد لله رب العالمين سنه ۱۱۰۳ ويليه سورة المريم"', 'Explicit: "قال من قرأ من اول سورة الكهف واخرها كانت له نورا من قدمه الى ساقه ومن قرأها كلها كانت له نورا من الارض الى السماء"', 'Incipit: "سورة المائدة مدينة كلها الا قوله اليوم اكملت لكم دينكم ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.5).", 'Ms. composite codex.', "Composite manuscript representing the second of four volumes of al-Baghawī's commentary on the Qurʼān, consisting of two sections: an earlier, original section (through p.408) treating Sūrat al-Māʼidah (5) to Sūrat al-Ḥijr (15), and a later addition (p.409-close) treating Sūrat al-Nahl (16) to Sūrat al-Kahf (18). Contents listing on flyleaf at opening (p.4)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 354', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, etc. would suggest latter 18th century. Date accompanying ownership statement provides a terminus ante quem of 1236 [1820 or 21]. This manuscript may have been one of the valuables inherited by Z̤iyāʾ al-Salṭanah Shāh Begum from her father's mother Āsiyah Khānum.", 'Former shelfmarks: "525 [?] T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" and "260" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Upper and lower covers lost, as well as spine leather (sewing, etc. fully exposed on spine) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; sewn in red thread, six stations, over two wide tapes, still intact ; overall in quite poor condition with upper and lower covers lost, abrasion, lifting and losses of spine leather, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian or Persian) laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct) and no chains clearly visible, thin, crisp and transluscent though sturdy, highly sized and burnished to glossy, grayish in color ; written area surface dyed pink, yellow, light green, etc. ; some breakthrough within written area in first few quires of second work.', 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of first work consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche (carrying the basmalah in white ink) flanked by delicate vegetal designs in gold, white and pink on a blue ground and bordered in bands of black and gold, surmounted by double w-shaped piece filled with delicate floral vegetal decoration in pink, green, yellow, etc. on fields of gold, blue, and green, all set in an elaborate well consisting of bands of red, gold interlace, and black and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and vegetal forms in gold ; another splendid headpiece at opening of second work on fol.100b consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche (carrying the basmalah in white ink) flanked by vegetal designs in gold and green on a blue ground and bordered in bands of green and gold, surmounted by w-shaped piece filled with delicate floral vegetal decoration in pink, green, yellow, etc. on bands of gold, blue, and dark lavender, all set in an elaborate well consisting of bands of black, gold, and green overlaid with floral designs and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and vegetal forms in gold ; illuminated marginal decoration bordering written area of incipit and facing page of opening and second work each consisting of a band of floral and vegetal forms in gold with green and red accents ; written area surface dyed pink, yellow, light green, etc., gold-flecked and surrounded by gold frame, divisions within also ruled in gold ; headings and keywords rubricated ; overlining in red ; textual dividers in the form inverted commas in red ; opening work illustrated with one half-page (fol.50a) and one full-page (fol.53b) miniature and final work illustrated with three half-page (fol.193b, 195a, 203b) miniatures and one full-page (fol.198a) miniature, all in Indian style.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; bold, elegant hand in a heavy line ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in distinct dots ; Arabic excerpts in a bold naskh, mainly serifless (though alif of lam alif ligature has left-sloping barbed serif) with dramatically sweeping descenders, usually fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Varies ; opening prose work written in 19 lines per page ; written area often divided to three columns with verses on the diagonal or alternating diagonal and horizontal in 10-16 lines (hemistiches) per column, for 15 to 24 lines of verse per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 4 IV(32), II (36), 2 IV(52), III-1 (57), 3 IV(81), III (87), IV (95), II (99), 8 IV(163), V (173), III (179), 3 IV(203), IV+3 (214) ; middle of the quire marks in the form of black oblique strokes appear in opposite outer corners of the facing leaves ; a few leaves ruled and tinted but left blank in opening work (see fol.33b, 42a, 74b) ; catchwords present.', 'Incipit: [Vaqāʼiʻ-i Ḥaydarābād] "روزنامچۀ وقایع ایام محاصرۀ قلعه دار الجهاد حیدرآباد سیز دهم رجب سنه ٣٠ دمی که مدرس کشاف صبح در صفۀ صدق و صفا ..." ; [Mas̲navī] "حمد و شکر او را که هرچه هست ازوست دام هستی حلقه دار از های و هوست ..." ; [Nān va ḥalvā ] "ایها اللاهی عن العهد القدیم ایها الساهی عن النهج القویم ..." ; [Farhād va Shīrīn] "الهی سینۀ ده آتش افروز در ان سینه دلی و ان دل همه سوز ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on 'title page' (fol.2a).", 'Ms. codex.', '9. fol.213b-fol.214b : [blank].', '8. fol.204b-fol.213a : [other poetic excerpts].', '7. fol.180a-fol.204b : Khusraw [Farhād] va Shīrīn / Vaḥshī Bāfqī.', '6. fol.179b : [blank].', '5. fol.169a-fol.179a : Nān va ḥalvā / Bahāʼ al-Dīn ʻĀmilī.', '4. fol.168b : [blank].', '3. fol.100b-fol.168a : [Mas̲navī] / Niʻmat Khān ʻĀlī.', '2. fol.100a : [blank].', '1. fol.2b-fol.99b : Rūznāmachah-i muḥāṣarah-i Qalʻah-i Dār al-Jihād / Niʻmat Khān ʻĀlī.', 'Splendid copy of a collection of works (majmūʻah) opening with Rūznāmachah-i muḥāṣarah-i Qalʻah-i Dār al-Jihād or Vaqāʼiʻ-i Ḥaydarābād, the journal of the seige of Ḥaydarābād by Awrangzīb in Rajab and Shaʻbān 1097 [1686] composed by Niʻmat Khān ʻĀlī Shīrāzī (d.1710), followed by a Mas̲navī of Niʻmat Khān, Nān va ḥalvā by Bahāʼ al-Dīn ʻĀmilī (d.1621), Farhād va Shīrīn (title in rubricated heading given as Khusraw va Shīrīn), one of the mas̲navīs of Vaḥshī Bāfqī (d.1583), and a few other poetic excerpts. Illustrated with six fine miniatures. Contributions to the cataloguing from Ali Rafi.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 86', 'Origin: Authorial and scribal colophons appear on p.708, supplied by "Muṣṭafá al-Qāḍī" (qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min tanmīq hādhā al-kitāb...katabahu..."). Authorial colophon mistakenly claims composition begain in the year "91" Hijrī. Opening of scribal colophon (possibly transcribed verbatim from exemplar) suggests that transcription was finished ("qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min taḥrīr hādhā al-kitāb...") first of Rajab 908 [ca. 31 December 1502]. However, the paper, hand, etc. would more likely suggest a dating of late 16th or early 17th century, and perhaps the copyist intended 980 [ca. 7 November 1572] rather than 908.', 'Accompanying materials: Three slips, all paginated -- a. pp.23-24 blank paper -- b. pp.289-290 text in black ink on one side -- c. pp. 465-466 notes in black ink on one side.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 16. Dakhirat al-ukba."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though only fore edge flap remains) ; board linings in blue and white shell marbled paper ; upper and lower covers bear blind-stamped scalloped mandorla with gold painted accents ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; endbands in orange and white ; in poor condition, with envelope flap lost, abrasion on all corners of cover, tail end of spine missing and exposing deteriorating primaries.', 'Support: European laid paper, a few different types ; one with very distinct laid lines (vertical) spaced roughly 9-10 laid lines per cm., chain lines spaced roughly 26-28 mm. apart, lightly burnished ; another thinner, more heavily burnished with roughly 12-13 laid lines per cm. (vertical, very fine and distinct) and chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart ; watermarks include crossbow (see p.220, compare Piccard no.123789), anchor in circle with trefoil above (p.196, compare Heawood 1 and 4) and figure (angel) in circle with "S c C" countermark (p.88/98, etc. matching Piccard no.21419 from Bari, 1587) ; loose leaves at beginning ; first two folia entirely detatched ; repairs made with similarly colored, laid paper ; water damage to head and tail of text, causing smudging of some glosses.', 'Decoration: Red rule border appears for opening through p.48 ; textual divders in the form of inverted commas, stylized hāʼ, etc. ; text rubricated with keywords, textual dividers, notabilia, etc. in red.', 'Script: Several different hands, as well as changes in ink and line thickness ; majority in a naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) with closed counters, superscripting of final words of line, esentially sans serif ; a few other hands in naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) appear, varying in size and elongation of horizontal strokes, with some exaggeration in thickness ; a few sections are supplied in a more standard naskh, though with slant to the left, mainly closed counters, occasional head-serifs on free-standing alif and initial lām ; hand first appears to change at p.44 and repeatedly thereafter, particularly in the latter quires (see pp.586-610, pp.611-624, pp.625-664, pp.665-684, etc.).', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', "Collation: I+1 (3), V-1 (12), 3 V(42), IV(50), III(56), 8 V(136), II(140), V(150), VI(162), 3 V(192), IV(200), 3 V(230), II(234), 2 VI(258), V(268), I(270), 7 V(340), VI(352) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present (occasionally correspond with second or third rather than first word of following page) ; foliation in Hindu-Arabic numerals in black ink (scribe's hand) starting after incipit (p.11) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (pagination skips two leaves between p.41 and p.42, and includes inserts).", 'Colophon: "Authorial" followed by "Scribal," rectangular, "تم بحمد الله وعونه وحسن توفيقه وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم قال الشيخ الامام الهمام عفى الله عنه يوسف بن جنيد عفى عنهما الحميد المجيد المدرس في احدى المدارس ... في بلدة القسطنطنية حرسها الله تعالى عن القلوب القاسية هذا اخر ما [...؟] لي في شرح صدر الشريعة المسمى بذخيرة العقبى ... وكان ابتداء التاليف تقريبا في احدى وتسعين [كذا] من الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلاة والسلام الى يوم الحشر والقيام. وقد وقع الفراغ من تحرير هذا الكتاب في اول رجب الفرد بتاريخ سنة ثمان و تسعمائة على يد افقر عباد الله تعالى و اضعفهم و احوجهم الى رحمة رب العالمين . . . قد وقع الفراغ من تنميق هذا الكتاب المسمى ذخيرة العقبى [كذا] الحشية لصدر الشريعة العظمى والمحشي اخي چلبي رحمه الله كتبه الفقير اليه تعالى مصطفى القاضي ..."', 'Explicit: "وان لم يمتد اعتقاله او لم يعلم اشاراته لم يكن حكمه حكم الاخرين فلا يعتبر اشارته و كتابته الحمد لله الموصل بالاتمام قوله والمقيم الذي لا يموت ولا ينام قوله والكفيل الذي اوصل الارزاق للانام [؟] والعليم الذي يعلم بلا الحاف والزام [؟] والحكيم الذي لا يحكم بين خلقه بالاتقان والاحكام وصلى الله على نبيه المنعوت بالاختتام وعلى اله اصحابه الذين فازوا على قهر العدو بعناية الملك العلام"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذى شرح صدر الشريعة الغراء ... وبعد فان تكميل النفوس الانسانية بالفضائل القدسية و تحليتها بالخصائل الانسية... فشرعت فيها ثانيا بعد ايابي من تلك الاراضي المقدسة ... وسميتها بذخيرة العقبى في شرح صدر الشريعة العظمى ..."', 'Title from colophon on p.706 and edge title.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the gloss by Yūsuf ibn Junayd Akhī Chelebi on Sharḥ al-Wiqāyah by Ṣadr al-Sharīʻah al-Aṣghar (al-Thānī) ʻUbayd Allāh ibn Masʻūd al-Maḥbūbī, itself a commentary on Wiqāyat al-riwāyah fī masāʼil al-Hidāyah by Maḥmūd ibn Ṣadr al-Sharīʻah al-Maḥbūbī, an epitome on the celebrated work of Ḥanafī fiqh, al-Hidāyah by ʻAlī ibn Abī Bakr al-Marghīnānī (see Isl. Ms. 97 for another ms. copy of this work). Description provided mainly by Sarah Mirza.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 871', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon though discussion of diagrams on p.3 address the years 1064-1066 [1653-6] ; paper, etc. suggests 17th century ; dated birth notice on p.15 provides rough terminus ante quem of 1712.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 20', 'Binding: Boards covered in mauve cloth with red-brown leather over spine and board corners (half binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted laid paper ; spine carries raised bands and is gold-stamped "RUZNAME-I-HAZRET-I-SHEYKH VEFA" ; sewn in white thread, eight stations, rather tightly bound ; stuck-on endbands in yellow ; head edge gilt ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (horizontal), and countermark "V G" under trefoil visible (see p.6, etc.) ; pastedowns/flyleaves and added leaves in a much later laid paper.', "Decoration: Simple 'headpieces' carry headings for most of the tables, consisting of rectangular pieces with cartouches set in fields of green, blue or red ; written area surrounded by triple rule-border in red and black ; keywords, headings and some numerals and symbols (in tables and diagrams) rubricated ; consisting mainly of tables and diagrams.", 'Script: Naskh ; compact Turkish hand ; mainly serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, many closed counters, curvilinear descenders, pointing (for two and three dots) mainly in strokes rather than distinct dots, freely ligatured.', 'Layout: Varies though each page after opening with circular diagrams (see p.2) typically with 5 lines of text above table and a varying numer of lines adjacent to table ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ix, IV (8), ix ; nine blank added leaves (including flyleaves) inserted before and after leaves carrying the text ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, center of lower margin on the recto of each leaf only ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (does not include added leaves).', 'Explicit: "احتراز لازمدر رياضتدن وسوار اولمقدن الله اعلم"', 'Incipit: "اكر يكشنبه حرفندن غفلت اولنور ..."', 'Title from rubricated heading at opening on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the calendar or almanac of Şeyh Vefa (Muslihittin Mustafa, d.1490) comprised mainly of tables for calendar conversion, etc. with instructions in Turkish.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 821', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon though discussion on p.1 addresses the year 1126 [1714 or 15] as an example and discussion on p.3 address the years 1064-1066 [1653-6] ; date in diagram on p.3 1157 [1744 or 5] may suggest a date of transcription ; paper, etc. would suggest 17th or 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Slip with notes inserted at close.', 'Binding: Pasteboards (quite thin) covered in black, red, orange and white mottled paper (sponge painted or faux marbled look) with red leather over spine and edges/turn-ins ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in yellow-tinted wove paper ; sewn in white thread, two stations ; overall in fair with minor pest damage, abrasion, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 29 mm. apart (horizontal), and three crescents watermark (roughly 80 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.12, etc.), sturdy, cream in color, well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Written area surrounded by double rule-border in red and black ; keywords, headings and some numerals (in tables and diagrams) rubricated ; numerous tables and diagrams.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Turkish hand ; serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, many closed counters, curvilinear descenders, pointing (for two and three dots) mainly in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Varies though each page after opening two with circular diagrams (see pp.2-3) typically with 3 lines of text above table and a varying numer of lines adjacent to table ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: III+3 (9) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Incipit: "شرح دائره سال حرف يكشنبه اسان وجهله بيان اولندى ... روزنامۀ حضرت شيخ وفا قدس سره اكر يكشنبه حرفندن غفلت اولور ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the calendar or almanac of Şeyh Vefa (Muslihittin Mustafa, d.1490) comprised mainly of tables for calendar conversion, etc. with instructions in Turkish.'])

en: (count: ['Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; decoration, hand, date among tables, etc. would suggest late 18th century or early 19th century.', 'Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1056', 'Binding: Wrapped in a short length of brown leather (unlined, limp) attached to opening of roll ; rolled around narrow wooden dowel (with finials of wood), not affixed to roll ; roll comprised of two lengths of parchment joined together ; overall in fair condition with minor pest damage and abrasion of leather.', 'Support: Parchment ; two sturdy pieces joined with adhesive (seams and overlap visible) ; writing seemingly on hair side ; pale yellow in color ; opening piece 570 mm. long, ; second piece 380 mm. long ; some warping, creasing and cracking, loss of ink.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of roll consisting of scalloped w-shaped piece filled with large, swirling floral vegetal motifs mainly in dark pink, white and light blue on a gold ground, set in a well of red-orange and gold and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) ; keywords and numerals and alternating columns or rows of headings and numerals rubricated ; tables framed in heavy gold bands outlined with black fillets ; narrower gold bands set apart headings and define margins ; rows and columns of tables defined by black fillets.', 'Script: Naskh ; chiefly a clear Ottoman hand in a medium line, small and compact ; mainly serifless with very slight effect of inclination to the left, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots, curvilinear though somewhat flattened descenders, etc.', 'Layout: Single column consisting of a series of tables (thirteen in total) with notes addressing occasions, etc. in the margins framing the tables along the length of the roll.', 'Explicit: "بو روزنامه ده تحرير اولنان سمت قبله نك قاعدسى املا مولده واسلامبولك طولنه وعرضنه مساوى اولان زمينلرده صحيح ساعت لر ايله بو جدولده كى مقداره كلدكده بر كمسنه كونشه قرشودوره تمام قبل توجه اتمش اولور بو روزنامه ده امساك اتمك ايچون ... كمسته اون بش دقيقه ... كرك ..."', 'Incipit: "بو غر نامده محرم كلدكده شهور عربينك تحتنده اولان ارقاملرى سكز خانه ده اولان ارقامك سنه ده هر برينه ضم ايده ديز وهفته كونلرينك تحتندن ..."', 'Title from closing text (at end of roll) describing contents.', 'Ms. roll.', 'Elegant copy of what appears to be a version of the almanac or calendar attributed to Darendeli Mehmet Efendi (Muḥammad ibn ʻUmar ibn ʻUthmān al-Dārandalī, d.1739) addressing qiblah direction, times of prayer, times of imsāk (15 minutes before time given which corresponds to dawn), etc. in rotulus format (i.e. scroll opening vertically). See King, "Part II. A Survey of Tables for Regulating the Times of Prayer," pp.442 (Fig. 14.4 b-c), 444-445 and Osmanlı astronomi literatürü tarihi (İhsanoğlu, Ed.), vol.1, no.271, pp.406-410.'])

en: (count: ['Origin: As appears in colophon at close of roll, copied by Mehmet Zuhuri in the medrese (madrasah) of Mahmut Paşa Veli. Date of transcription not specified. Date with notes on paper lining leather wrap and added between month and day tables provides a terminus ante quem of 1868. Table of years covers 1261 [1845 or 6] through 1349 [ca. 1933]. Rubricated date between tables (1194 [1780 or 81]) may reflect date of transcription of the exemplar or date of composition of this recension.', 'Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1055', 'Binding: Wrapped in a length of dark red-brown leather (lined with paper) attached to opening of roll ; rolled around narrow wooden dowel affixed to end of roll, finials of ivory or bone with inlaid wood and metal ; roll comprised of two lengths of parchment ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion and tears.', 'Support: Parchment ; two pieces of slightly different thicknesses joined with adhesive (seams and overlap visible) ; writing seemingly on hair side ; opening piece 610 mm. long, thin, but thicker and sturdier than second piece ; second piece 322 mm. long, quite thin and even transluscent ; some abrasion and tears, minor pigment burn.', 'Decoration: Opening rectangular panel may have once contained a horiscope, now effaced with traces of blank and orange ink (elsewhere orange ink has been used to apply writing over effaced contents of مدخل اذر columns) ; keywords and alternating columns or rows of headings and numerals rubricated ; jadwals surrounded by "gold" frames, gone to green ; outer margin defined by a narrower rule of the same.', 'Script: Naskh ; chiefly a clear Ottoman hand in a medium line, small and compact ; mainly serifless with very slight effect of inclination to the left, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots, free assimilation of some letters (hāʼ joined to preceding dāl, etc.), point of nūn often assimilated with abbreviated bowl, etc.', 'Layout: Single column consisting of a series of tables (twelve in total) with notes addressing occasions, etc. in the margins framing the tables along the length of the roll.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "سوده محمد ظهورى بمدرسۀ محمود پاشا ولى"', 'Explicit: "بو روزنامه ده تحرير اولان سمت قبلنك فائده سى بودر كه دائما صحيح ساعتلر بو جدولده كى مقداره كلدكده برادم كونشه قرشودورسه تمام قبليه توجه اتمش اولور وبو ضحوۀ كبرانك فائده سى قلبه كبى صحيح ساعتلر بو جدولده كى مقداره كلدكده ضحوۀ كبرى اولور وصوم ايچون امساك كمنه اون بش دقيقه مقدم اتمك كركدر م"', 'Incipit: "بو غره نماده محرم كلدكده شهور عربينك تحتنده اولان ارقاملرى سكز خانه ده اولان ارقامك سنه ده هر برينه ضم ايده دز هفته كونلرينك تحتنده ..."', 'Title from closing text (at end of roll) describing contents.', 'Ms. roll.', 'Carefully executed copy of what appears to be a version of the almanac or calendar attributed to Darendeli Mehmet Efendi (Muḥammad ibn ʻUmar ibn ʻUthmān al-Dārandalī, d.1739) addressing qiblah direction, times of prayer, times of imsāk (15 minutes before time given which corresponds to dawn), etc. in rotulus format (i.e. scroll opening vertically). See King, "Part II. A Survey of Tables for Regulating the Times of Prayer," pp.442 (Fig. 14.4 b-c), 444-445 and Osmanlı astronomi literatürü tarihi (İhsanoğlu, Ed.), vol.1, no.271, pp.406-410.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 988', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and eventually bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974). As appears on the \'title page\' for certain sections (see p.245, i.e. \'title page\' for the 15th Ṣaḥīfah on the third bāb, etc.), copied by the anonymous "ا ع" who has identified himself as the copyist of other manuscripts eventually bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974), see Isl. Ms. 905, Isl. Ms. 910, Isl. Ms. 937, Isl. Ms. 981, Isl. Ms. 998 and likely Isl. Ms. 929.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 137', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "تهذيب المنطق والكلام | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Machine wove paper of two main types ; one type, cream in color with watermarks of what appears to be a head portrait (bordered in branches with a ribbon) and tuğra / ṭughrā of the sultan (see pp.2, 4, 16, 18, etc.) ; another type brown in color, with no watermarks visible ; one bifolium in ruled (graph) wove paper near opening (see pp.5-8).', 'Decoration: Text executed entirely in red ink.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand initially in a bold line, later in a much thinner line ; serifless and freely ligatured with effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 17-21 lines per page.', 'Collation: Leaves between sections left blank ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (follows p.299 with p.230, and thereafter off by 70).', 'Incipit: [Ṣaḥāʼif al-aʻlām sharḥ Tahdhīb al-kalām] "الباب الثاني في الامور العامة لما عتد لكل من الواجب والجوهر والعرص بابا على حده يبحث فيه عنه كان من حسن الصناعة ان يضع بابا للامور العامة الشاملة الثلاثة ..." ; [Tajrīd kalām al-ḥukamāʼ min al-Tahdhīb] "هذا تجريد اقوال الحكماء المحكية في تهذيب السعد للكلام بباب الجواهر من اقوال غيرهم مع تعليقاتنا : ا ع ص قالوا الجوهر إن كان قابلا للابعاد فجسم ولا فإما جزء له بالفعل فصورة او بالقوة فمادة واما خارج يتعلق به فنفس والافعقل ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', '3. p."235"-p."272" : Tajrīd aqwāl al-ḥukamāʼ al-maḥkīyah fī Tahdhīb al-Saʻd maʻa taʻlīqāt Alif ʻAyn.', '2. p."234" : [blank].', '1. p.1-p."233" : Ṣaḥāʼif al-aʻlām sharḥ Tahdhīb al-kalām.', 'Careful copy of selected commentary in 47 and 29 sections on the second and third bābs of al-Taftāzānī\'s (d. 793/1390) Tahdhīb al-manṭiq wa-al-kalām, followed by further commentary on the Tahdhīb including glosses by the copyist, the anonymous "ا ع" .'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 29', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon. Paper and hand may suggest late 15th century. Replacement leaves very likely date from early 19th century. Perhaps signature of glossator on p.152 "تم هذا [...؟] على يدي المذنب اليه ... محمد بن الحاج علي في سلخ ... [؟]".', 'Accompanying materials: Two blank slips (paginated pp.101-102 and pp.109-110).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 93. Al-Akaid." ; "٣۹۷" on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in marbled paper (blue, green and pink) with spine, fore-edge and edges/turn-ins in red leather (marbled paper faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in yellow European laid paper ; sewn in white thread, two stations (primaries in rose) ; fine worked endbands in blue-green and yellow ; in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: non-European paper, furnish extremely cloudy, likely laid but any laid and chain lines are extremely diffuse and difficult to see ; repairs in European paper ; replacement leaves at opening and close in a variety of papers - European laid, European wove, and non-European ; flyleaves and some replacement leaves in European laid paper with "E A D" mark visible.', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with keywords, section headings, overlining, sigla and other abbreviations in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; two main hands ; bulk of the text in a Turkish (?) hand, virtually serifless, rounded, freely ligatured, with slight tilt to the left, mainly closed counters, some sweeping descenders ; replacement leaves at opening and close in an Ottoman nastaʻlīq (talik), serifless, with mainly closed counters, effect of tilt to the right and words descending to baseline, extended in the horiztonal ; glosses in more angular nastaʻlīq (talik).', 'Layout: Written in 21-29 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, VI-1+1 (12), 5 VI(72), VI-11 (73), III+2 (81), I+1 (84), i ; chiefly sexternions ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and inserts, skips two pages between pp.171-172).', 'Explicit: "يكون امامة كل من الخلفاء الاربعة حقا هذا ما عندي والله اعلم بجميع السرائر. خاتمة الكتاب ايها الراغب الى تحقيق الحق ... والثاني الشوق الى الحق ذلك فضل الله يؤتيه من يشاء والله واسع عليم والحمد لله رب العالمين والصلى الله على نبينا محمد خير البرية وعترته الطيبين تم تم تم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي استحق الوجود والوحدة بالذات ... اما بعد فان العلوم وان تنوع افسامها وتفرع انقسامها لكن اشرفها مرتبة واعلاها منزلة هو العلم الآلهي ... فدعاني هذه المعاني تصنيف كتاب ... وسيته بالصحائف الآلهية ورتبته على مقصدين الاول في المبادي والثاني في المسائل ... واسوهبت من الله تعالى الهام الحق وافهام الصدق انه عليم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب ..."', 'Title provided by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the treatise on theological matters by Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Ashraf al-Samarqandī (d.1303?).'])

en: (count: ['Title from spine.', 'Text rubricated and vocalized and enclosed in gold border; marginal commentaries and foliations in hand of copyist; table of contents on pp. [1-75]; illuminated ʻunwān on p. [79]; edges gilded in foliate patterns.', "Date and copyist's name in colophon: waqaʻa al-farāgh ... min kitābat al-Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī waqt al-ḍuḥá fī al-yawm al-tāsiʻ wa-al-ʻishrīn min shahr Rajab al-fard sanat sabaʻ wa-sittīn wa-miʼah wa-alf [i.e. 22 May 1754] ... ʻalá yad ... al-sayyid al-ḥājj Muḥammad ibn al-sayyid al-ḥājj Pīrī ... sanat 1167.", 'For a commentary on the Ṣaḥīḥ by an unidentified author, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 182.', 'His most famous work, arranged in 97 books with 3450 bābs (chapters) containing 2762 prophetic traditions.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 38', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper and hand suggest 15th century. Cover likely contemporary with transcript.', 'Accompanying materials: Slip of European laid paper with excerpt in black ink (paginated pp.85-86).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 18. Commentary on a work on theology by Al-Iji." ; "٣٩٤" on tail-edge of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublure hinges and interior of envelope flap extending onto lower doublure in red brown leather with block-stamped vegetal pattern ; board linings in paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-tooled central circular medallion consisting of a series of concentric circles formed with a crescent-shaped stamp, accents in same stampe, and border in s-shaped stamps and scored fillets ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn in cream thread, four stations ; endbands virtually gone though traces remain ; in fair condition with abrasion, lifting and cracking of spine and fore-edge flap leather, some pest damage, repairs in blue cloth tape, and paper label bookplate pasted over upper cover.', "Support: non-European (Arab) laid paper with indistinct laid lines spaced 8 laid lines per cm. (20 laid lines in 25 mm.) ; chain lines grouped in threes running horizontally spaced roughly 10 mm. apart with roughly 43-45 mm. between the groups ; well-burnished with some burnisher's marks visible ; quite smooth ; some undissolved fibers.", 'Decoration: Text rubricated with keywords, overlining, etc. in red ; occasional textual dividers in the form of red discs or inverted commas.', 'Script: Naskh ; graceful hand ; sans serif ; mainly closed counters ; kāf mashkūlah preferred ; slight effect of tilt to the right ; some swooping tails ; initial hāʼ looking like two inverted commas.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii,13 IV(104), ii ; quire numbering in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, appears on the recto of the first leaf for the second through the sixth quires, thereafter likely cut off ; entirely quaternions ; catchwords present, though occasionally lost to trimming ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert).', 'Explicit: "هو الوقت المشروع اولا وبعد الوقت المطنون تضيقه قبل الوقت و اقره اليه اد [؟]"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي شرع الاحكام وربطها بدلائل كلية وعلل تفصيلية للاحكام وابار معالم الدين بانوار الكتاب والخير ..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf verso.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of al-Abharī's gloss upon al-Ījī's (d. 756/1355) commentary on Ibn al-Ḥājib's (d. 646/1249) abridgement of his own Muntahá al-suʼl wa-al-amal fī ʻilmay al-uṣūl wa-al-jadal, on uṣūl al-fiqh. Copy ends abruptly and appears incomplete."])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated and enclosed within gold borders; white space with gold borders separates discussions of each chapter of the Koran; marginal notes and corrections in hand of copyist; on p. [1], table of contents; on p. [5], name of copyist: bi-khaṭṭ taʻlīq katabahu al-sharīf bi-Ṣadr al-Dīn Zādah; on p. [5], invocation against bookworms: kabikaj.', 'copying repeated in Turkish in illuminated roundel on p. [847].', 'Date of completion of original manuscript and of copying in colophon: qāla muʼallifuhu al-ʻallāmah mawlānā Saʻd Afandī ... waqaʻa al-ikhtitām ... yawm al-arbuʻāʼ khāmis Jumādá al-ūlá al-munkharaṭ fī silk shuhūr sanat arbaʻ wa-arbaʻīn wa-tisʻumiʼah [i.e. 10 October 1537] tamma ... yawm al-arbuʻāʼ arbaʻ ʻashar Muḥarram al-ḥarām fī shuhūr sanat arbaʻ wa-khamsīn wa-alf [i.e. 13 March 1644] ... ʻalá yad ... Ibn Muḥammad Amīn Rūḥ Allāh al-shahīr bi-Ṣadr al-Dīn Zādah; date of', 'Commentary on the Koran.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 411', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; statement on 'title page' identifying work and author appears to be dated 1160 [1747] and provides a rough terminus ante quem ; paper, decoration, etc. also certainly suggest 18th century.", 'Former shelfmark: "478 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in maroon leather ; Type II binding (with flap), likely two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in pink surface-dyed, textured wove paper (embossed in vegetal pattern of large leaves, flowers and vines) ; upper and lower covers carry tooled and gold-painted border and outline of central panel ; sewn in golden yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in magenta and dark blue, good condition ; overall in good condition with minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of grapes (raisin) under crown (see p.18, 28, etc.), transluscent and crisp though sturdy, well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of gold rectangular piece surmounted by scalloped dome filled with floral vegetal decoration in white, pink, light blue, and lavender with red accents on a gold ground, entire piece set in a well of red with white accents and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area (and divisions within) surrounded by gold frame defined by black fillets ; section headings chrysographed.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand ; seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on most ascenders (even occasional free-standing alif), effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, mainly open counters, pointing in conjoined dots, fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page with written area mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 5 V(50), IV (58), ii ; quinions followed by a quaternion ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "سهو وعصيانه افندم بقمه فرقتك آتش ايله يقمه"', 'Incipit: "حمد اول خالقه كه يكتادر حكمنده عقلا شيدادر ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of Ayn-ı Ekber Mehmet Efendi's (d.1722) versified Turkish work on the characteristics of the Prophet."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 313', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.862, copied and illuminated (gilded) by Murshid al-Dīn ibn Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Mudhahhib [al-Muẕahhib] with transcription completed 23 Muḥarram 894 [ca. 27 December 1488].', 'Former shelfmark: "164 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf (p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in deep red leather with large central mandorla in leather filigree appliqué over blue paper and green silk as well as gold-painted accents and tooled border ; upper and lower covers carry exquisite stamped scalloped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition somewhat similar to Déroche class. OSd 2 on a gold ground) and cornerpieces, along with tooled border featuring rows of s-shaped stamps ; design continues on flap ; sewn in light pink and blue thread, two stations, failing, gatherings loose ; worked chevron endbands in light green-blue and light pink, damaged, tailband gone ; overall in fairly good condition with minor staining, abrasion, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chains only faintly visible (possibly in pairs), sturdy and fairly thick, deep cream in color, well-sized and burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Superb illuminated frontispiece on \'title page\' (p.3) consisting of a scalloped almond (mandorla) or diamond shaped medallion with gold cartouche (carrying "لصاحبه السعادة والسلامة" mainly effaced) surrounded by floral vegetal pattern in green, gold, red, yellow, white, and pink on a lapis lazuli ground, bordered in gold with blue tīgh accents ; exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ ) at opening on p.4 consisting of large rectangular piece with central almond-shaped cartouche carrying title ( "ديوان امير خسرو دهلوى" ) in white over light blue arabesque and surrounded by swirling floral vegetal design (in gold, pink, white, yellow, turquoise, etc. on fields of lapis lazuli and gold) and lozenge border reminiscent of book cover design, surmounted by a row of arabesque and floral motifs in gold, red, turquoise, pink, white, yellow, etc. on fields of gold and lapis lazuli, all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of gold band defined by black fillets and outermost blue rule ; section headings and keywords chrysographed or in blue.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; compact, elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 14 lines per page with written area often divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV-1 (7), 52 IV(423), IV-1 (430) ; exclusively quaternions (first and last anomalous) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf)', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, in Arabic, reads "تمت الكتاب من كلام افصح المتكلمين وقدوة الشاعرين امير خسرو دهلوى قدس الله روحه العزيز ورحمة الله عليه والحمد لله على اتمامه والصلوة والسلام على خير خلقه محمد واله واصحابه وازواجه ذرياته في يوم السبت ثالث عشرين محرم الحرام سنه اربع وتسعين وثمانمائة كتبه وذهبه العبد الراجي الى رحمة الله الملك الواهب مرشد الدين بن صدر الدين المذهب اللهم اغفر لصاحبه ولكاتبه ولقاريه ولجميع المؤمنين والمؤمنات"', 'Explicit: "هر که علیکم نبگوید تمام به که سلامش نکنم و السلام"', 'Incipit: "حمد رانم برزبان لله رب العالمین آنکه جان بخشید در قرآن هدی للمتقین ..."', 'Title from illuminated headpiece at opening on p.4.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Dīvān of Amīr Khusraw Dihlavī (d.1325).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 26', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper would suggest early 17th century. Inscription on front flyleaf would indicate that the commentary was copied by Shaykh al-Qurrāʼ Shaʻbān Afandī. Whether he also authored the text is unclear.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 128. Commentary on Masabih."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in European laid paper with red-brown leather over spine and turn-ins ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; board linings in yellow laid paper ; sewn in yellow thread, four stations ; endbands virtually gone, only traces remain ; in poor condition with much staining, abrasion, holes in spine, spine lining exposed, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. and chain lines (vertical) space roughly 30 mm. apart ; watermark crown with star and crescent above (compare Heawood 1132) ; countermark difficult to make out, includes trefoil.', 'Decoration: Written surrounded by red rule-border ; text rubricated with section headings, keywords, overlining, sigla and other abbreviations, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Turkish (?) hand ; virtually serifless, though occasional head-serifs appear indiscriminately ; very slight effect of tilt to the left ; open and closed counters ; free assimilation of letters such as rāʼ with final hāʼ also point of final nūn often assimilated with bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 33 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: vi, V-9 (1), 10 V(91), ii ; chiefly quinions ; acephelous with roughly 89 leaves missing from the head of the text ; also ends abruptly ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (mistakenly skips ١١١) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes some flyleaves).', 'Explicit: " وهذا الكلام وفي بعض النسخ كلاهما على بناء الفاعل اي اعطي هو بها اكثر مما اعطي هو بها ويجوز ان يكون الاول على بناء الفاعل والثاني على بناء"', 'Incipit: "والزكوة على ذلك ان ترك شيئا من المفروض تكمل في التطوع ..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf.', 'Ms. codex.', "Acephelous copy of a commentary on Mishkāt al-Maṣābīḥ, the arrangement by Walī al-Dīn al-Khaṭīb al-Tibrīzī (fl.1337) upon al-Baghawī's (d.1117?) extensive collection of traditions sorted by subject matter. Excerpts from several other commentaries on Mishkāt al-Maṣābīḥ are provided in the margins, including the Mirqāt al-mafātīḥ of al-Qārī al-Harawī (d.1605 or 6). Opens in Kitāb al-ṣalāh and ends in Kitāb al-buyūʻ, though the partial fihrist which has been provided extends further."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 408', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at close, copied by the author Ebu Bekir Nusret with transcription completed 9 Dhū al-Ḥijjah (Yawm ʻArafāt) 1178 [ca. 30 May 1765].', 'Former shelfmark: "128 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; likely originally two-piece binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in olive green-tinted, silver-flecked laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry gold-painted (over black inlays) mandorla, pendants, and cornerpieces all filled with vegetal compositions and set off with gold-tooled rosette accents, as well as border of similar gold-painted vegetal composition (on light brown recessed inlays) defined by tooled guilloché rolls and gold-painted fillets ; design continues on envelope flap ; edges of text block gold-painted with vegetal designs ; sewn in dark pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in dark pink and brown with gold filaments ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion, etc. ; University Library conservation treatment (December 2012) with repairs in maroon Japanese paper to spine (rebacked) and fore edge flap (outer joints and interior) as well as inner hinges (original hinges removed and replaced with olive-green Japanese paper), etc., native repairs to spine and fore edge flap removed ; housed in custom box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper mainly a type with 11-12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23-25 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of names (see pp.26, 50, 270, etc.) and horn in shield with crown above and figure "4" and initials below (see pp.22, 30, 38, 30, 274, etc.) ; minor foxing.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening consisting of rectangular piece carrying the basmalah, surmounted by piece evoking row of scalloped domes filled with swirling floral vegetal decoration in gold, pink, white, lavender, light blue, yellow, orange, etc. on fields of gold and blue, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue with red accents and set in a well of pink with white accents ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by marginal decoration in a swirling vegetal pattern of gold with red accents, with text of written area set off by gold cloud-bands ; written area throughout surrounded by gold frame defined by black fillets with outermost red rule ; keywords and text being elucidated rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of gold discs ; occasional overlining in red ; illuminated tailpiece consisting of vegetal composition in gold surrounding colophon.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) ; somewhat quick and compact Turkish hand in a heavy line ; serifless and rounded with slight effect of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), elongation of horizontal strokes, mainly closed counters, free assimilation of letters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 36 V(360), ii ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; quire numbering in the form of whole words (i.e. "جزء رابع مقطوع") appearing in the upper outer corner of the recto of the opening leaf (partially cut off in many cases) for six quires near the center of the volume (see pp.201, 221, 241, 261, 281, 301) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمت ترجمة التائية على يد مترجمه الفقير اليه سبحانه ابو بكر نصرت نصره الله فى الدارين وذلك يوم الاربعا وهو يوم العرفة من ذى الحجة الحرام سنة ثمانى وسبعين ومائة والف من هجرة من له العز والشرف تم"', 'Explicit: "عفو ايليوب قبرين روضۀ جنان ايليه سبحانك اللهم وبحمدك اشهد ان لا اله الا انت استغفرك واتوب اليك"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذى سخر نظام عالم الالفاظ للطبائع الموزونة ... اما بعد معلوم اوله كه بو مبتلاى شبايك كثرت يعنى ابو بكر نصرت مقدما ديوان صايب مذاكره سيله بر مدت اشتغال ضمننده الف قافيه سندن وافر غزللر ترجمه ايدوب تسويددن اخراجنه وقتم مساعده ايتمديكندن شاكر دل', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant, apparently autograph copy of the elucidation (or loose translation, ترجمه ) in Turkish by Ebu Bekir Nusret (d.1795), of al-Tāʼīyah, selected poems in tāʼ from the Dīvān of Ṣāʼib (d. between 1080/1669-70 and 1088/1677-8).'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Andrea Galvani of Pordenone; eagle with initials A and FNF in roman. For the first see Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 36 and no. 860.', 'Tables rubricated.', 'Consists entirely of sexagesimal multiplication tables used to facilitate astronomical calculations.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 117', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.113-114, copied by Maḥmūd ibn Ḥājjī Muḥammad (Mahmut bin Hacı Mehmet) in the medrese of the Nişancı Mehmet Paşa complex in Istanbul. Transcription of the first work finished in Dhū al-Qaʻdah 1083 [February-March 1673]. As appears on p.127, transcription of second work finished 1083 [February-March 1673]. Colophon on p.196 is quite difficult to make out, but seems to indicate that transcription of final work was completed in 1084 [1673 or 1674]. Paper certainly suggests 17th century.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 153. Tracts on dialectics."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in laid marbled paper (blue and white) with spine, fore-edge flap, and edges/turn-ins in red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; sewn in pink thread, two stations, with primaries in yellow ; only traces of worked endbands remain ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, some lifting and losses of leather (particularly at fore-edge flap), delamination of boards, fore-edge flap detaching at lower cover, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal) ; paschal lamb in four-lobed circle watermark [compare Piccard inv. J 340/no. 86802 / (Venice, 1662), Heawood 2840 (Verona, 1678), Piccard inv. J 340/no. 86801 (Innsbruck, 1625)] ; fairly sturdy and well-burnished ; some staining.', "Decoration: Keywords and abbreviations rubricated ; overlining in red ; crude rectangular 'headpiece' in red ink above opening on p.4 ; written area surrounded by red rule-border.", 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq ; virtually serifless ; mainly closed counters ; slight effect of words descending to baseline ; final words/letters of line often superscript ; exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 3 V(30), VI (42), IV (50), III (56), 2 V(76), VII (90), V-1 (99) ; final two leaves originally left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular then triangular, reads: "تم هذه الحاشية الشريفة على يد العبد الضعيف المفتقر الى رحمة العافي ... محمود بن حاجي محمد ... في مدرسة نشان جى پاشا في قسطنطنية في وقت الضحى اوقات في شهر ذي القعدة سنة ثلث وثمانين والف الحمد لله على التمام والصلوة والسلام على محمد سيد الانام ... تم تم تم سنة ۱٨٣٠ [١٠٨٣] ; "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت سنة ۱۸٣٠ [١٠٨٣] تاريخ سنة ثلثة ثمانين والف" ; "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب والمحمد بتاريخ ستة وثمانين ... والف سنة [؟] سنة ١٨٤٠ [١٠٨٤]"', 'Explicit: "و بما يحصل المقصود كما مر في الشق الاول من الشرديد [؟]"', 'Incipit: [Shāh Ḥusayn ʻalá Qarah Ḥāshiyah] "قوله سلك طريق الخ اعلم ان من دأب المصنفين ان يبتدأوا في اول تصانيفهم بكلام مشتمل على لفظ الحمد ..." ; [Qarah Ḥāshiyah] "الحمد لله الذي لا مانع لعطائه ..." ; [] "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة على رسوله محمد واله اجمعين وبعد فقد قال الامام المحقق ... شمس الملة والدين محمد السمرقندي المنة علينا من من عليه لواهب ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on front flyleaf (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.128-p.196 : [al-Masʻūdī] / Kamāl al-Dīn Masʻūd al-Shirwānī al-Rūmī.', '3. p.116-p.127 : [Qarah Ḥāshiyah] / ʻImād al-Dīn Yaḥyá al-Kāshī.', '2. p.115 : [originally left blank].', '1. p.4-p.114 : Shāh Ḥusayn ʻalá Qarah Ḥāshiyah / ʻAbd al-Laṭīf Shāh Ḥusayn al-ʻAjamī.', "Fine copy of a supergloss on a gloss by ʻImād al-Dīn Yaḥyá al-Kāshī (ca.1350) upon the commentary by Kamāl al-Dīn Masʻūd al-Shirwānī al-Rūmī (d.1499) on al-Samarqandī's (13th c.) treatise on disputation, Risālah fī ādāb al-baḥth. Followed by the text of al-Kāshī's gloss and al-Shirwānī's commentary."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 352', "Origin: As appears in colophon on p.680, copied by Muḥammad Khayrʹshāhī [?] with transcription completed 15 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1297 [ca. 18 November 1880]. As appears in preceding 'authorial colophon' (also on p.680), composition supposedly completed in 1059 [1649] in Akbarʹābād (Agra) in the time of Shāh Shujāʻ.", 'Accompanying materials: Scrap of tinted and block-printed paper with excerpts (proverb "الدهر ثلاثة ايام يوم قد مضى لا يعود اليك ويوم انت فيه لا يدوم عليك ..." etc.) in black ink (between pp.436-437).', 'Former shelfmark: "505 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" and "۹" inscribed in pencil on recto of opening leaf (serving as flyleaf, p.1) ; "15/6" and "٢٥" (with numeral khamsah looking like reversed B) inscribed in ink also on opening leaf recto (serving as flyleaf, p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type III binding (without flap), two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; doublures in dark gray leather ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition) with pendants, as well as tooled border and accents ; sewn in lime green and red (final few gatherings) thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in lime green and light red, good condition (protected by tabs extending from spine leather) ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion and staining, spine curved and fore edge protruding, etc.', 'Support: European wove paper, dark cream in color, quite well-burnished, thin and crisp though sturdy ; leaves at opening and close (serving as flyleaves) also in highly burnished wove paper but of a lighter color ; breakthrough at frames in leaves carrying p.679-682.', 'Decoration: Keywords, numerals and section headings rubricated (words to be entered in red have been provided in the outer margins, mainly cut off, but in a few instances still visible, see p.41, 42, etc.) ; written area surrounded by frame in "gold" accented with red rules ; margin also surrounded by red rule-border ; overlining in red ; occasional textual dividers in the form of inverted commas ; several diagrams, mainly in red and black (see p.265, 289, 431, 432, 433, 435, 436, 437, 438, 439, 442, 443, 444).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; quite compact, elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes ; Arabic excerpts in a compact naskh.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: II (4), 42 IV(340), 2 I (344) ; almost exclusively quaternions ; several leaves ruled but left blank (see pp.9-10, 17, 44, 254, 460, 681-682, etc.) or partially blank (likely for diagrams / illustrations never realized, see p.27, 28, 43, 253, 270, 445, 456, 459, 497, 513, etc.) ; twenty pages (p.[]-p.534) ruled for tables but left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes leaves serving as flyleaves at opening and close and skips two pages between pp.515-516).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," reads " تصنيف اين كتاب بتاريخ هزار و پنجاه و نه ۱۰۵۹ در يمده [مدينه ؟] اكبر اباد در زمان شاه شجاع بهادر اتفاق افتاد" ; "Scribal," reads "الحقير الفقير محمد خير شاهى [؟] ۱٥ شهر ذي الحجه الحرام سنه ۱۲۹۷"', 'Explicit: "یونین بضم یا و سکون واو و کسر نون وسکون یاء تحتانیه و نون موضعی است بشام"', 'Incipit: "حالات با خود گفتم ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.11.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine, though acephalous, copy of extracts, anecdotes and miscellaneous notices by Muḥammad Ṣādiq ibn Muḥammad Ṣāliḥ al-Iṣfahānī al-Āzādānī (d.1650 or 51). Author's contents listing in opening matter (pp.11-16)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 261', 'Origin: As appears in scribal colophon on p.115, copied ("nammaqahu") by Āqā Muḥammad al-Marāghī with transcription completed in 1066 [1655 or 6]. As appears in authorial colophon at close on p.115, composition completed 9 Rabīʻ II 1047 [ca. 31 August 1637].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Scrap of paper with unsigned note "treatise of Shīah theology 1665 [sic]-1656 AD" -- b. Scrap of paper with note in French "Poésies a persan par Md Alauram [?] al Kateb 954 ... £ 900" (paginated pp.107-108).', 'Former shelfmark: "394 T. D. M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; two-piece binding (overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; board linings and hinges in marbled paper (in mauve, orange, light blue, blue, etc.) ; upper and lower covers carry tooled and gold-painted guilloché roll border flanked by gold fillets as well as blind diagonal rules intersecting near center of panel ; sewn in red thread, two stations, failing, most gatherings loose ; worked chevron endbands in pink and light green, headband virtually gone, tailband damaged but in fair condition ; overall in good condition with only minor abrasion, lifting of leather at spine, negative draw in lower cover, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (mainly vertical) and chain lines visible but indistinct, cloudy formation, beige in color, crisp, transluscent, and well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.4, consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying basmalah in white and elegant swirling vegetal design in gold, yellow, red, lavender, white, etc. on a field of lapis lazuli surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) with flanking partial dome pieces filled with similar vegetal decoration on fields of gold, lapis lazuli, etc. ; rectangular piece is surrounded by rich border with bands of red and turquoise flanking a heavy band of gold interlace and entire piece is surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area throughout surrounded by frame consisting of gold and turquoise bands with outermost blue fillet ; use of cloud-bands (in gold) throughout ; keywords in blue ink.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; bold, elegant hand ; serifless with characteristic descent of words to baseline and superscripting of words and letters at the end of each line ; pointing in distinct dots ; extension and exaggerated thickness of many horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, written area occasional divided to two columns to set-off poetry ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV-2 (6), 6 IV(54), I (56), i ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert).', 'Dedication: As appears in preface (dībāchah) on p.5-6, dedicated to Shāh Ṣafī I (r.1629–1642).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, Arabic, reads: "نمقه العبد المذنب الراجى آقا محمد المراغى سنه ١۰۶۶"', 'Incipit: "حمد بیحد و ثنای بیعد معبودی را سزد که بافاضۀ [به افاضه] انوار وجود مكتومات ظلمات عدم را بعرصۀ ظهور در آورده ..."', 'Title from preface (dībāchah) on p.7.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Superb copy of the treatise on Shīʻī theology by Rafīʻ al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Ḥaydar al-Ḥusaynī al-Ṭabāṭabāʼī al-Nāʼinī (d.1670 or 73?), in an introduction (in two parts, faṣl-i avval, faṣl-i duvvum) and eight subjects (maṭlab) each in several faṣls.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 876', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; hand, paper, etc. suggest 19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with description in hand of G. Meredith-Owens "MO II PERSIAN | Shajarat al-amānī. Rules of grammar explained in Persian followed by a similar work entitled Zubdat al-qawāʻid." (paginated pp.1-2) -- b. Recycled card with note in hand of Emilie Savage-Smith [?] "binding by Menzies, London, 1914" (paginated pp.3-4) -- c. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) with Meredith-Owens notes" (paginated pp.5-6) -- d. Slip with note "counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" (paginated pp.7-8) -- e. Tag with "#9" -- f. Slip torn from a ruled notebook tipped-in describing second work with title, author, etc. in black ink "فارسى نثر زبدة القواعد يعنى [؟] خلاصه قواعد صرف فارسى تاليف مير مهدى ..."', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 25', 'Binding: Boards covered in mauve paper (in blotched design evoking marbling) with brown leather over spine and board corners (half binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in \'marbled\' wove paper (mainly in beige and blue) ; spine gold-stamped with title "SHADJARATU L-AMĀNĪ VA ZUBDATU L-QAWĀʻID" ; sewn in cream thread over recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands in red, blue-green and white ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion of leather at spine and board edges.', 'Support: non-European laid (likely Persian or Indian) paper of two main types ; opening work on a type with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly indistinct, curving) and no chain lines plainly visible, quite cloudy formation, thin and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished, dark cream in color ; second work on a type with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly indistinct, curving) and irregular chain lines faintly visible (see p.84), cloudy formation, inclusions and fibers visible, thin and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished, beige in color ; added / replacement leaves in European wove paper.', 'Decoration: Section headings and keywords rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq and taʻlīq with elements of shikastah ; two elegant hands ; opening work in a compact nastaʻlīq, serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes or conjoined dots ; second work in a taʻlīq with elements of shikastah, partially seriffed with left slopin head-serifs, leftward foot on alif, many swooping descenders (some recurved or reversed), effect of words descending to baseline, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, somewhat freely ligatured.', 'Layout: Written in 19-20 and 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iv, IV (8), IV-4 (12), II (16), IV (24), II+1 (29), 2 (31), V (41), i ; mainly quaternions ; blank leaves added at opening and close of codex (including final quinion), as well as between the two works ; catchwords present ; pagination in black ink, Western numerals (distinct for each text) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes most inserts and central added leaves).', 'Explicit: [Shajarat al-amānī ] "بلاغت از مقلدان ربوده تمام شد" ; [Risālah-i Zubdat al-qavāʻid] "حلقۀ طوق مكر ساخت تمت تمام شد تم تم تم تم تم تم تم"', 'Incipit: [Shajarat al-amānī ] "فصيح ترين كلامى كه از جوش صفا گوهر شاهوار و لولوى آبدار را در عرق خجالت ... قتيل زوليده بيان كويد كه اين مختصر مسمى بشجرة الامانى سطرى جند است ..." ; [Risālah-i Zubdat al-qavāʻid] "الحمد لله رب العالمين رضوان [؟] الله على رسوله محمد خان المرسلين ... اما بعد اين رساله زبدة القواعد قليل الحجم كثير الفوائد ... بالتقصير [؟] مير مهدى ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from opening matter of first work on p.12 and of second work on p.43.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '6. p.70-92 : [blank].', '5. p.69 : [fragments carrying descriptions].', '4. p.68 : [blank].', '3. p.43-p.66 : Risālah-i Zubdat al-qavāʻid / Mīr Mahdī [?].', '2. p.34-p.42 : [blank, apart from abandoned opening on p.34].', '1. p.12-p.33 : Shajarat al-amānī / Muḥammad Ḥasan Qatīl.', 'Careful composite copy of two concise grammatical treatises, Shajarat alamānī, a work on Persian grammar and rhetoric by Muḥammad Ḥasan Dihlavī, known as Qatīl (d.1817), and Risālah-i Zubdat al-qavāʻid, a work on Persian grammar attributed to one Mīr Mahdī.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 351', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.358, transcription completed 17 Ramaḍān 1238 [ca. 28 May 1822].', 'Accompanying materials: Slip with excerpts (in Persian, black ink) paginated (pp.149-150).', 'Former shelfmark: "431 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on front flyleaf (p.1).', 'Binding: Heavy pasteboards covered in painted lacquerwork, spine in dark brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in fine painted lacquerwork of swirling floral vegetal composition radiating from a central many-petalled flower in gold on a black ground and surrounded by vegetal border (composition of upper doublure mirrors that of lower doublure) ; upper and lower covers bear paintings of nearly identical floral composition in mirror image to one another on a dark red background, namely a stand of peonies, poppies, roses, etc. surrounded by other floral forms all in shades of pink, light blue and white with stalks and leaves in various shades of green, and surrounded by decorative band of vegetal motifs on a black ground framed in gold-painted borders ; sewn in pink and dark yellow thread, two stations, failing with some gatherings loose ; worked endbands damaged and nearly gone (head and tail) ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion and losses to lacquerwork and pasteboard, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical and horizontal, some curving, fairly distinct) and no chain lines visible, thin, crisp and transluscent though sturdy, well-sized and burnished to glossy, gray to off-white in tone ; minor pest damage.', 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.4 consisting of a narrow rectangular piece carrying the basmalah set off by gold cloud-bands and flanked by elaborate floral vegetal compositions on fields of gold and blue with red accents (evoking a series of domes), surmounted by another narrow rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by elaborate floral vegetal composition on fields of gold and blue with red accents (evoking a perimeter of domes), itself surmounted by a large scalloped dome in gold (with blue mandorla at the center) set against a w-shaped piece in blue (approaching lapis lazuli) all filled with swirling vegetal composition with floral motifs in sades of orange, pink, lavender, blue, yellow, etc. and set in an elaborate well of cartouches in blue, gold, and red filled with floral compositions and bordered in bands of red and white, entire piece set in a well of heavy interlace in gold and black, defined by white bands ; on incipit and facing page (pp.4-5), splendid illuminated marginal decoration consisting of a swirling vegetal composition with sāz leaves and floral forms in gold, orange, pink, blue, etc. ; written area of incipit and facing page bordered in bands of blue and gold with text set off by gold cloud-bands ; elsewhere written area surrounded by gold frame with defining black fillets and outermost blue rule, divisions within and margin defined by gold rules.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page, written area occasionally divided to set off poetry ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 22 IV(176), II (180) ; almost exclusively quaternions ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "... با قليمى رسا بند و ازان تاريخ با سجال نه خود مراجعت كردند و نه مكتوبى از ايشان رسيد دوخ روز از دام مكر و جمله و تزوير ايشان نسخات باقيه بعيش و نشاط مشغول كرديد بتوفيق الله تعالى در صبح يوم الاربعاء سابع عشر شهر رمضان المبارك باتمام رسيد وكان تحرير ذلك في سنه ۱۲۳۸"', 'Incipit: "چهره پرداز عرایس حریم عجز و نیاز و مصور نگارخانۀ فرنگ آب و رنگ مضمون اين نسخۀ مسرت طراز ..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf (p.1) and from opening matter on p.5.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Exquisite copy of excerpts from the collection of stories by Mīrzā Barkhvurdār ibn Maḥmūd Turkmān [Turkamān], Mumtāz Farāhī.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1031', 'Origin: As appears in authorial colophon on p.530, dictation of the composition by the author completed ("wa-qad faraghtu min imlāʼih ...") end of Shaʻbān (Ramaḍān in other copies) 965 [June 1558] in Istanbul ( قسطنطنية ). Date of transcription for this copy not specified, though paper, decoration, hand, etc. would certainly suggest 16th century and it may have been executed before the author\'s death.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 180', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in bright red leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures (board linings) in block-printed paper (yellow and red on dark blue), flyleaves in fine marbled paper (in dark blue, light blue, pink, yellow) ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped central ornament (evoking vegetal shape in the manner of a pendant that that would accompany a mandorla) and border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in light blue and white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and cream, quite good condition ; overall in fair condition with some staining, minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, some curving, sagging) and no chain lines visible ; quite thin, crisp and transluscent, well-sized and burnished, smooth, dark cream to beige in color ; a few leaves of European laid paper here and there (see pp.96, 100, etc.) with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 32-33 mm. apart, no watermarks visible, stiffer and sturdier, text on these leaves supplied in same hand as elsewhere.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular panel with gold cartouche (carrying the basmalah in white nastaʻlīq) surrounded by swirling vegetal decoration in gold with turquoise, dark lavender, and dark red floral accents on a field of lapis lazuli or cobalt, surrounded by decorative bands in gold, black and light blue and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) also in bright lapis or cobalt ; written area surrounded by heave gold frame defined by black fillets ; keywords and notabilia rubricated (some notabilia in blue ink) ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', "Script: Naskh ; compact, carefully executed 'Syrian' or Turkish hand ; serifless with effect of tilt to the left, slight effect of words descending to the baseline, pointing mainly in distinct dots but occasionally in strokes (for two and three dots), curvilinear descenders, compact but with especially tall ascenders with effect of elongation in the vertical, final yāʼ often left unpointed, partially vocalized.", 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 3 V(30), IV (38), IV+1 (47), 19 V(237), IV+1 (246), 2 V(266) ; chiefly quinions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of pencil stroke in the outer margin of the left-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; flyleaves now affixed to opening and closing leaves ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Authorial," reads "وليكن هذا اخر الكتاب وقد املته على بعض من الاصحاب مع كلال البصر ... وقد فرغت من املائه يوم السبت آخر شعبان المبارك سنة خمس وستين وتسعمائة بقسطنطنية المحمية"', 'Explicit: "ومنهم الشيخ الصالح مصلح الدين مصطفى من خلفاء السيد احمد البخاري ... توفى رحمه الله قريبا من الستين وتسعمائة روح الله روحه ونور ضريحه والحمد لله وحده هذا ما تيسر لي بعون الملك العلام من تفصيل احوال علماء الاعلام وذكر مناقب المشايخ العظام وحين آن آوان الاختتام ... وليكن هذا اخر الكتاب وقد املته على بعض من الاصحاب مع كلال البصر ... وقد فرغت من املائه يوم السبت آخر شعبان المبارك سنة خمس وستين وتسعمائة بقسطنطنية المحمية ... واجب يا رب دعوتي وثبت حجتي وسدد لساني واهد قلبي واسدل سخيمة صدري سبحان الله وبحمده سبحان الله العظيم ... كتاب شقائق النعمان بعون الملك الديان والحمد لله وحده"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي رفع بفضله طبقات العلماء وجعل اصولهم ثابتة وفروعهم في السماء ... وبعد فاني منذ ما عرفت اليمين من الشمال والمستقيم من المحال كنت مشغوفا بتتبع مناقب العلماء واخبارهم ...ولما شاهد هذه الحال بعض ارباب الفضل والكمال التمس مني ان اجمع مناقب علماء الروم فاجبت الى ملتمسه ... وضعت الرسالة على ترتيب سلاطين آل عثمان ولهذا سميت بالشقائق النعمانية في علماء الدولة العثمانية ..."', 'Title from opening matter (preface) on p.3.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant early copy of the celebrated biographical work by Taşköprüzâde (Taşköprî-zâde) İsam ed-Dîn Ahmet (d.1561), mainly addressing ʻulamāʼ and ṣūfī shaykhs under the Ottomans and organized in ten classes (ṭabaqāt) corresponding to the reigns of the first ten Ottoman sultans through Süleyman I (r.1520-1566).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 603', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.377, copied by Ahmet bin Mehmet bin Bâlî (Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Bālī ; احمد بن محمد بن بالي ) with transcription completed ("waqaʻa al-farāgh ʻan taḥrīrih wa-imlāʼih wa-tarqīmih ...") 3 Muḥarram 1032 [ca. 7 November 1622]. As appears in closing matter (\'authorial colophon\') on p.376, dictation of the composition by the author completed ("wa-qad faraghtu min imlāʼih ...") end of Ramaḍān 965 [July 1558] in Istanbul ( قسطنطنية ).', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and \'title page\' (p.1) "IL 229" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Boards covered in deep teal cloth ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in olive green cloth ; sewn in dull pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, damaged with losses to head and tailband, cores exposed ; overall in somewhat poor condition with upper board and spine cloth detaching, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper ; mainly with 9 laid linse per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 29-30 mm. apart (horizontal), and crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.24, 34, 88, 89, etc.), sturdy, medium cream in color, well-burnished to glossy ; also toward in the latter part of the codex, another type with 11-12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25 mm. apart (horizontal), and crossbow in circle watermark (see p.268, 269, etc.), thin and crisp though still dense and sturdy, well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and notabilia rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas or discs.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Turkish hand, small and compact ; serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline, some sweeping descenders, pointing (multiple dots) mainly in strokes or conjoined dots, free assimilation of letters.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V-1 (9), 18 V(189) ; virtually exclusively quinions ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "وقع الفراغ عن تحريره واملائه وترقيمه بعون الله وانعامه على يدا [؟] عبده الفقير الى عفوه وغفرانه احمد [؟] بن محمد بن بالي في اليوم الثالث من محرم الحرام لسنة اثنتين وثلثين والف من الهجرة النبوية عليه افضل السلام والتحية هر كه خوند [خواند] دعا طمع دارم زانكه من بندهء كنهكارم"', 'Explicit: "ومنهم الشيخ الصالح مصلح الدين مصطفى من خلفاء السيد احمد البخاري ... توفى رحمه قريبا من ستين وتسعمائة روح الله روحه ونور ضريحه هذا اخر ما تيسر لي بعون الله الملك العلام من تفصيل احوال علماء الاعلام وذكر مناقب المشايخ العظام وحين آن آوان الاختتام ... فليكن هذا اخر الكتاب وقد الميته على بعض من الاصحاب ... وقد فرغت من املائه يوم السبت آخر شهر رمضان المبارك بتاريخ سنة خمس وستين وتسعمائة بمدينة قسطنطنية ... واجب يا رب دعوتي وثبت حجتي وسدد لساني واهد قلبي واسدل [اسلل] سخيمة صدري سبحان الله وبحمده سبحان الله العظيم الكريم لا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم م"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي رفع بفضله طبقات العلماء وجعل اصولهم ثابتة وفرعهم في السماء وزين سماء الشريعة والاسلام بانوار افكار الفضلاء ... وبعد فاني منذ ما عرفت اليمين من الشمال والمستقيم من المحال كنت مشعوفا بتنبع مناقب العلماء واخبارهم ... ولما شاهد هذه الحال بعض من ارباب الفضل والكمال التمس مني ان اجمع مناقب علماء الروم فاجبت الى ملتمسه ... وضعت الرسالة على ترتيب سلاطين آل عثمان ولهذا سميت الرسالة بالشقائق النعمانية في علماء الدولة العثمانية ..."', 'Title from opening matter (preface) on p.3.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of the celebrated biographical work by Taşköprüzâde (Taşköprî-zâde) İsam ed-Dîn Ahmet (d.1561), mainly addressing ʻulamāʼ and ṣūfī shaykhs under the Ottomans and organized in ten classes (ṭabaqāt) corresponding to the reigns of the first ten Ottoman sultans through Süleyman I (r.1520-1566). A contents listing (ṭabaqāt by sultan) is provided on the 'title page' (p.1)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 282', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.373, copied by Ibn marḥūm Abū al-Khayr [?] Āshtiyānī al-Qummī Yaʻqūb with transcription completed in Āshtiyān in 22 Muḥarram 1252 [ca. 9 May 1836].', 'Former shelfmark: "17/4" in ink on \'title page\' (p.1) ; "103 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" in pencil on final leaf (p.376).', 'Binding: Heavy pasteboards covered in painted lacquerwork, spine in quite dark brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; two-piece binding (overlapping flanges visible) ; doublures in fine painted lacquerwork with paintings of a tall narcissus-like plant with leaves in shades of green and flowers and buds in yellow with pink accents at the head of a central stalk, flanked by smaller pink flowers, all on a red ground with border in black with gold accents (composition of upper doublure mirrors that of lower doublure) ; upper and lower covers bear paintings of nearly identical floral composition in mirror image to one another on a deep golden-orange or bronze-colored background, namely a central cluster of peonies, poppies, tulips, etc. with additional buds and floral forms filling the main panel all in shades of pink, light blue, lavender, and white with leaves in various shades of green, and surrounded by decorative band of floral vegetal motifs on a deep golden-orange or bronze-colored ground framed in black borders with gold accents ; sewn in light red (opening nine and final six quires) and spring green thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in light red and spring green, fair condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with some abrasion and losses to lacquerwork and pasteboard, cracking and crazing of lacquer, minor delamination at board corners, breakage and losses at joints where spine leather meets boards, spine almost fully detached except where primaries are sewn through spine lining, etc. ; not flush with text block, slightly tall and wide ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European machine laid paper mainly with chain lines 21 mm. apart and "laid lines" in a cross-hatch pattern, watermarks include "BENto PICARDO" (see p.4, 12, 358, etc.), scrollwork with motif resembling diamond flanked by C\'s and 1833 below (see p.364, etc. compare motif as appears in Heawood nos. 3728 and 3747), and six-pointed star with eFIGLI below (see p.352, 370) ; crisp, transluscent though sturdy, light cream with tinge of gray, well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Fine illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying the title in black ("ديوان امير معزى") flanked by arabesque motifs in gold, red and blue, surmounted by a scalloped dome filled with swirling arabesque in gold with red and blue accents, all set in a well of gold and black bands framing red vegetal accents ; written area surrounded by a frame of gold bands defined by black fillets with outermost blue rule, columns within also defined by gold bands.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (with elements of shikastah-nastaʻlīq) ; compact, elegant hand ; serifless, with slight effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes, freely ligatured.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page, written area mainly divided to two columns; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 6 IV(48), III+2 (56), 15 IV(176), 2 III(188) ; almost exclusively quaternions ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals in black ink in the upper outer margin of the verso of the final leaf of each quire ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes back flyleaf).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "بتاريخ يوم دوشنبه بيست و دويم شهر محرم الحرام هزار و دويست و پنجاه و دو هجرى در قريه اشتيان صورت اتمام پديرفت حرره العبد اقل ابن مرحوم ابو الخير [؟] آشتيانى القمى يعقوب ..."', 'Explicit: "بهر جشنى كه بنشينى سعادت همنشين بادت بهر راهى كه بخرامى سلامت راهبر بادت"', 'Incipit: "ستاره سجده برد طلعت منير ترا زمانه بوسه دهد پايه سرير ترا ..."', 'Title from illuminated headpiece at opening on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Dīvān of Muʻizzī (Amīr Muʻizzī), Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd al-Malik (d. between 1125-7).'])

en: (count: ['Illuminated ʻunwān on p. [1]; text rubricated and enclosed within gold borders; marginal commentaries in hand of copyist; foliation in hand of copyist; edges gilded in foliate patterns; vol. has edge title.', '... qad waqaʻa al-farāgh ... min taḥrīr sharḥ al-aḥādīth al-arbaʻīn ʻalá yad Muḥamamd ʻĀrif ... fī yawm al-arbuʻāʾ al-ʻishrīn min shahr Rabīʻ al-ākhir min al-sanah al-sābiʻah baʻd al-sittīn wa-al-miʾah wa-al-alf [i.e. 14 February 1754].', 'Dates of completion and final copying in colophon: wa-qad waqaʻa al-farāgh ... ʻan taḥrīr hādhā al-sharḥ al-mustaṭāb ʻalá yad jāmiʻihi Muḥammad ibn Muṣṭafá al-Amkartānī[?] mawlidan wa-al-Ḥanafī madhhaban wa-al-Mātrīdī iʻtiqādan wa-dhālika fī Jumādá al-ūlá min al-sanah al-sābiʻah baʻd al-khamsīn wa-al-miʾah wa-al-alf [i.e. June-July 1744]', 'Completion of a commentary on a selection of 40 prophetic traditions begun by Birgivî Mehmet Efendi (ca. 1522-1573).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 623', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.149, copied by Muḥammad ibn Khālid Bīk [?] al-Raḥlāwī al-Shāfiʻī [?] in the Sumayṣāṭīyah madrasah in Damascus with transcription finished 10 Rajab 875 [ca. 2 January 1471]. Collation statement in the hand of the author also on p.149 indicates that this copy was collated with an exemplar in his hand and the collation completed 25 Shaʻbān 876 [ca. 6 February 1472].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 173" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', "Binding: Very thin pasteboards (only a few layers of paper thick) covered in surface-dyed black paper with recycled paper (i.e. manuscript 'waste') and parchment over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; 'board linings' and hinges in recycled paper ; original sewing stations visible (two plus primaries) though now resewn in cream thread (mainly stab sewn) and sewn through spine at center with threads visible on spine and at p.66 and p.75 ; overall in quite poor condition with significant lifting and losses of paper and spine parchment, delamination of 'boards' (layers of recycled paper visible in upper cover), moisture damage, etc. ; housed in box for protection.", "Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper of perhaps two 'types', the first with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines grouped in threes with 11-14 mm. between the chains and 33 mm. between the groups (see bifolium pp.109-112), the second with 9-10 mm. between the chains and and 42-44 mm. between the groups (see bifolium pp.67-74, 107-114, etc.) ; mould marks are only faintly visible in many leaves of both 'types', both very sturdy though soft, burnished and quite smooth, with some inclusions ; second quire (replacement) on European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), and crown-star-crescent watermark (roughly 60 mm. in height, see pp.30-32) ; alternating bifolia in fifth quire tinted yellow.", 'Decoration: Keywords and text being commented upon (matn al-Ājurrūmīyah) rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas.', 'Script: Naskh ; at least three fine Syrian hands as well as hand of replacement leaves ; opening hand virtually serifless (though occasional head-serifs appear on free-standing alif), with curvilinear descenders, rightward descenders tapered, mainly open counters, pointing in distinct dots, alif of قال often curving back as if to supply pointing for qāf (though dots also appear) ; second quire on later replacement leaves in different, clear Turkish hand, with effect of tilt to the left ; hand from there until just before the close clear though angular with many closed counters, slight effect of tilt or inclination to the right, pointing in distinct dots, vertical character ; section toward the close in still a different hand, somewhat flattened and elongated in the horizontal, rounded with slight tilt to left, pointing mainly in distinct dots ; partially vocalized throughout.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 6 V(60), V-1 (69), III (75) ; chiefly quinions ; second quire replaced (likely 17th century) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "وكان الفراغ من هذه النسخة المبراكة ان شاء [؟] الله تعالى على يد الفقير المذنب الحقير محمد بن خالد بك [؟] الرحلاوي الشافعى [؟] بدمشق المحروسة بمدرسة السميصاطية ... عاشر شهر رجب الفرد المعظم من شهور سنة خمسة وسبعين وثمانمائة والحمد لله ..."', 'Explicit: "وهي عبارة عما افادت تعريفا كما تقدم كقولك عبد الله او تخصيصا كقوله صلى الله عليه وسلم صلى الله عليه وسلم خمس صلوات كتبهن الله وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد خير خلق الله واخوانه من النبيين وال كل وصحب كل وسائر عباد الله الصالحين وسلم افضل صلواته وسلامه عدد معلوماته كلما ذكر الذاكرون وعقل عن ذكره العاقلون تم [؟] وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم والحمد لله رب العالمين ونسأل الله المغفرة لنا ولجميع المسلمين"', 'Incipit: "وبه نستعين اللهم صل على سيدنا محمد وآله وصحبه وسلم الحمد لله الذي علم بالقلم علم الانسان ما لم يعلم وصلى الله وسلم على سيدنا ومولانا محمد ... اما بعد فيقول اضعف عباد الله تعالى واحوجهم الى عفوه ومغرفته ورحمته محمد بن محمد ابن الحلاوي غفر الله ذنوبه وستر عيوبه في الدنيا والاخرة امين [لما] رأيت قلوب طلبة العلم من تحصيل ابناء زماننا اسعدهم الله مشغوفة ... المختصر في علم النحو للشيخ الامام ابي عبد الله محمد بن محمد بن داود ... الشهير بالجرومي ... واقسم علي من لا اقدر حنثه لما وجب علي من حقه ان اجمع شرحا على هذا المختصر ..."', 'Title from inscription on interior of upper cover.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy (even collated by the author himself) of the commentary by Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Ḥalāwī al-Maqdisī (d.1478) on Ibn Ājurrūm's (d.1323) concise treatise on iʻrāb, al-Muqaddamah al-Ājurrūmīyah."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 622', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; ownership statement in name of Muḥammad Saʻīd ibn ʻAlī al-Asadī provides a terminus ante quem of 1133 [1720 or 21] ; paper, hand, etc. would suggest mid to late 16th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 180" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in yellow laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition) and pendants (with recessed onlays) as well as tooled floral accents and rule border ; sewning gone, traces of two sewing stations, most bifolia now split ; overall in somewhat poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; serves as wrapper for the gatherings, perhaps never attached to text block though sized fairly well.', 'Support: European laid paper of a few different types ; opening type with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-29 mm. apart (horizontal), anchor (two line) in circle with six-pointed star above watermark (roughly 62 mm. tall, see p.66, 75, etc.), and possibly "AP" countermark (see p.111, etc.), sturdy and well-burnished ; another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart (horizontal), font with lid and cross (or cardinal\'s mitre / chapeau) watermark (see p.190, 191, 228, 233, etc. and compare Velkov Chapeau nos.1-8 and Nikolaev nos. 31-32) and "CC" under trefoil countermark (see p.250, etc.) ; final flyleaf with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 29 mm. apart (vertical), and three crescents watermark (85 mm. long, perpendicular to chains).', 'Decoration: Keywords and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', "Script: Naskh ; spacious, elegant and idiosyncratic Turkish or 'Syrian' [?] hand in a narrow line ; virtually serifless and quite rounded with thickening and elongation of many descenders and horizontal strokes, occasional inclination to the right or left, pointing in distinct dots, point of final nūn set deep and nearly fully encircled by bowl, final yāʼ and alif maqṣūrah mainly mardūdah ; hand changes at p.401, also quite elegant, fluid and rounded with bowl of final nūn fully encircling dot.", 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: 24 V(240), VI (252), i ; almost exclusively quinions (though most bifolia now split) ; catchwords present ; foliation in brown ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "هذا اخر ما تضمنت هذه الارجوزة من علم احكام النحو ولذلك لما انتهى اليه لم يعقبه باكثر من قوله وما بجمعه عنيت قد كمل ... فاعلم انه قد انتهى غرضية من هذا النطم وانه قد اشتمل على اعظم المهمات من علم العربية تم ختم الكتاب بحمد الله تعالى وبالصلاة على نبيه محمد صلى الله عليه وعلى آله واصحابه الطيبين الطاهرين صلاة دائمة الى يوم الدين سبحان ربك رب العزة عما يصفون وسلام على المرسلين والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "اما بعد حمد الله سبحانه وتعالى بما له من المحامد على ما اسبغ من نعمه البوادي والعوايد ... فاني ذاكر في هذا الكتاب ارجوزة والدي في علم النحو المسماة بالخلاصة بشرح يحل منها المشاكل ويفتح من ابوابها كل مقفل ..."', 'Title from inscription on interior of upper cover.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the commentary on the Alfīyah by Ibn Mālik (Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd Allāh, d.1273) by his son, Badr al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad (d.1287), on grammar.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 100', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.108a, copied by Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad al-ʻAdī [?] al-Khazrajī with transcription finished 21 Ṣafar 983 [ca. 1 June 1575], likely in Edirne, where he was living (nazīl).', 'Accompanying materials: Several slips and scraps scattered throughout with calculations, excerpts, etc. each paginated (see pp.139-140, pp.149-150, pp.161-164, pp.195-196, pp.221-222) along with a document bearing circular seal impression (paginated pp.171-172).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 39. Work on law of inheritance."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; upper and lower covers bear central blind-stamped mandorla and pendants (compare Déroche class. OSd 8) as well as border and cornerpieces consisting of a series of incised fillets ; sewn in cream thread, 2 stations ; endbands in red and green, nearly gone from tail ; in fair condition with abrasion, staining, leather burn, some delamination of boards at corners, etc.', 'Support: non-European (Persian) laid paper with laid lines mainly oriented horizontally and spaced 7 laid lines per cm. ; chain lines only visible sporadically as short lengths ; fairly transluscent and crisp ; flyleaves in European laid paper with three crescents (tre lune) watermark.', 'Decoration: Written area surrounded by border varying from simple red or gold rule-border to frame consisting of gold band or bands outlined by black fillets and outermost blue fillet ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas ; text chrysographed with keywords and section headings ; rubricated with overlining, textual dividers, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; graceful Ottoman hand ; partially seriffed with left-sloping head-serif on ṭāʼ, lām, etc., free-standing alif usually serifless, effect of slight tilt to the left, mainly curvilinear descenders, pointing chiefly in lines or strokes (curved stroke for three dots), even final kāf carries shaqq, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ, point of final nūn most often set just above bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: iii, 2 V(20), IV (28), 5 V(58), 2 IV(94), V (104), III (110), ii ; chiefly quinions ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals in the center of the upper margin of the recto of the first leaf of each quire, often cut off ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, begins with ۱ on fol.1b (p.6) and continues thereafter on recto of each folio ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم الكتاب والله اعلم بالصواب في حادي عشرين شهر صفر الخير سنة ثلاث وثمانين وتسعمائة على يد احقر عباد الله واحوجهم الى رحمته وغفرانه محمد بن احمد العدي [؟] الخزرجي نزيل ادرنة المحمية اللهم اغفر لمستكتبه ولكاتبه ولمن قرا فيه ودعا لهما بالمغفرة امين"', 'Explicit: "فقد اجتمع لام كل منهما عشرون ولبنت كل منهما ستون وللمولى عشرة"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الملك العلام الذي جعل العلماء الاعلام ورثة الانبياء عليهم السلام ... وبعد فاني لما فرغت عن تصحيح المختصر المؤلف في علم الفرائض المنسوب الى الامام الهمام سراج الدين السجاوندي ... بتغيير ما فيه الخلل من جهة التعبير عن المعاني واصلاح ما فيه الزلل من جهة التقرير للمباني اردت ان اشرحه شرحا وافيا في تحرير المسائل ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Kemalpaşazade's (Ibn Kamāl) commentary on the treatise on inheritance by Sirāj al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Sajāwandī (6/12th cent.)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 572', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.258, transcription completed 1011 [1602 or 3].', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 268" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (in yellow, dark blue, green etc.) with dark red leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; sewn in blue thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in blue and cream (or light yellow), fairly good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with much abrasion and staining, lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of perhaps several types ; one type with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-28 mm. apart (horizontal), and anchor in circle watermark (see p.48, 49 ,et c.) ; another type with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart (horizontal), and odd mark (possibly crustacean, scorpion or eagle, see p.42, 56, 130, etc.) ; staining and tide lines ; mends (to cover holes) in leaves carrying pp.113-128.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; overlining in red ; written area of opening quires (i.e. from opening through p.83) surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Turkish hand ; virtually serifless with marked tilt to the right, only very slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, free assimilation of letters.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 13 V(130) ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly skips two pages between p.29 and p.30).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تمت الكتاب بعون الله تعالى وحسن توفيقه قد وقع فراغ هذه النسخة المباركة على يد اضعف عباد الله واحقره المحتاج الى رحمته سنة عشر واحدى والف"', 'Explicit: "وقد اجتمع لام كل منهما عشرون ولبنت ستون ولمولاه عشرون [عشرة] والله اعلم بالصواب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين وصلى الله على خير خلقه محمد واله اجمعين قال الشيخ الامام سراج الملة والدين محمد بن عبد الرشيد السجاوندي نوره الله مرقده بعد ما تيمن بالتسمية الحمد لله حمد الشاكرين والصلوة على خير البرية ... تعلمو الفرائض وعلموها الناس فانها نصف العلم هكذا رواية الفقهاء فالفرائض جمع فريضة وهي ما قدر من السهام في الميراث وانما جعل العلم بها نصف العلم اما لاختصاصها باحدى حالتي الانسان ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Clear copy of the commentary by ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad al-Jurjānī, al-Sayyid al-Sharīf, (d.1413) on the celebrated work on the law of inheritance by Sirāj al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Sajāwandī (fl. 12th cent.).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 573', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.116, copied and collated from a copy itself copied and collated from a copy in the hand of the author, with transcription completed 825 [1421 or 2] in Bursa [?].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inscription on \'title page\' (p.1) and trace of paper cover (between pp.64-65) "IL 203" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Textblock only, covers lacking ; traces of adhesive and paper cover (see scrap between pp.64-65 carrying label with shelfmark) at spine ; sewn in blue thread, two stations, missing from many quires ; in fair condition considering covers gone, some spine slant, minor abrasion and tears.', "Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly distinct), chain lines (horizontal) grouped in threes with 9-11 mm. between chains and 40-50 between groups ; somewhat cloudy formation, some inclusions, quite well-burnished with burnisher's marks visible.", 'Decoration: Abbreviation symbols, keywords and section headings rubricated ; several diagrams in red and brown ink tracing inheritance distribution.', "Script: Naskh with influence of nastaʻlīq ; fine Turkish or 'Syrian' [?] hand ; virtually serifless with marked tilt to the right, very slight effect of words descending to baseline, wajh al-hirr usually used for initial hāʼ, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, elongation of horizontal strokes, free assimilation of letters, etc.", 'Layout: Written mainly in 21 to 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 5 V(50), IV (58), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تم شرح الفرائض بعون الله وحسن توفيقه هذا الشرح الشريف كتب وقوبل وصحح بقدر الوسع والامكان من النسخة التي كتبت وقوبلت من النسخة التي كتبت بيد الشارح شهاب الدين رحمة الله عليه رحمة واسعة رحمة الله لمن دعا لكاتبه ولسائر المسلمين والمسلمات يا قاضي الحاجات امين يا رب العالمين تاريخ سنة خمس وعشرون وثمانمائة تم الكتاب وقت الظهور شهر بورسة [؟]"', 'Explicit: "ولبنته ستون ولمولاه عشرة دنانير فيكون للام من كلي الثلثين اربعون ... اما اذا علم ولكن جهل عينه اعطى كل واحد منهم اليقين ويوقف المشكوك فيه حتى يتيقن اذا يصطلحوا فيما بينهم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي ابرز بالفرائض بهجة رياض الشرع واظهر بها [؟] قوانين الاصل والفرع ... اما بعد فلما كان خير ما يصرف الانسان عن وسعه ... هو علم الفرائض ... وكان مما صنف فيه كتاب الشيخ الامام ... سراج الائمة تاج الامة ... وقد كنت سامعا من افواه العلماء والسن الفضلاء فيه ابحاثا شريعة ... فوجه عنان الالتماس الي جمع من الطلبة المترددين على ان اجمع لهم تلك الفوائد كما سمعتها عنهم بالفاظهم الفرائد فجمعتها جمعا يتضح به الكتاب غاية الوضوح ..."', 'Title from colophon on p.116.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine early copy of the commentary by Shihāb al-Dīn Abū al-Ḥāmid Aḥmad ibn Maḥmūd al-Sīwāsī (d.1400) upon the celebrated work on the law of inheritance by Sirāj al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Sajāwandī (fl. 12th cent.).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 584', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests 15th-16th century ; conceivable that this is an autograph of a minor work.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. -- c. Inserted slips on a mix of Oriental and European papers at pp.52, 78 (sewn-in), 96, 128, 228, 470, 522, and 734 ; with the exception of 470-A, which marks the end of the first \'book\', and 96-A these slips appear to contain further notes on the text ; some have been sewn in, others tipped in ; none appear to be in the hand of the copyist, although some of the hands are recognizable from the marignalia ; 96-A may be a slip from a bookseller, with inscription mentioning "penal law" ("droit pénal"), the name "M. Talaat" and numbers that could be prices.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 181" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western binding ; board linings in green wove paper ; resewn in white thread ; in good condition.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper ; chain lines appear sporadically, occsaionally grouped in twos, 11-14 mm. apart ; roughly 9 laid lines per cm. ; paper is not heavily burnished and is fairly translucent ; the codex was seriously damaged by water and mold at some point, causing some loss of text in the final leaves ; the ms. might benefit from having some of the now dry mold removed.', 'Decoration: Simple headpiece lightly sketched in red ink at the top of fol. 4b (p.8), consisting of a wide-based triangle sitting atop a three-compartment rectangle, in the middle compartment of which is the basmalah ; texts of fol.4b and 5a are framed in a red rule-border, and the next few folia with a black fillet ; text rubricated with keywords and overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; Persian or Transoxanian hand (?) ; alifs are sans serif and taper slightly towards the bottom ; counters are closed ; the lām alif al-mukhaffafah is most commonly used.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 3 + II (7), 48 IV (391), IV + 1 (400) ; chiefly quaternions ; fol.4-6 have been bound in prior to the opening folia, immediately apparent from the existing foliation ; foliated in Hindu-Arabic numerals beginning with ١ on the leaf facing the basmalah and ending with ٤٢٥ ; the foliator appears to have repeated fol. 59, repeated fol.167, jumped from fol.169-180, skipped the fol. between fol. 242 and fol.243, jumped from 289 to 300, repeated 306, and jumped from 389 to 400 ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "ويقدم على سائر حقوق الغرباء[؟] فضلا عن الوصايا والارث لقوت الاستيلاد"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي قوم قوائد الدين بتأسيس اساس الاسلام وشد واركان ضوابط اليقين باحكام ترصيف معاقد الاحكام ورفع ... وسواه وسدده وقواه اشد تسوية واقوى تقويةبالفيض "', 'Title from inscription on fol.4a (p.7).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Much glossed commentary attributed to ʻAlī Zayn al-Dīn al-Ḥakīm (possibly an autograph) on al-Ījāz, a Shāfiʻī legal treatise by Maḥmūd ibn Muḥammad al-Kahbanānī al-Aṣfahīdī al-Kirmānī (d.807/1404-5) itself a commentary on the Muḥarrar of ʻAbd al-Karīm ibn Muḥammad al-Rāfiʻī al-Qazwīnī (d.623/1226). Description provided by Noah Gardiner.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 135', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Scrap with calligraphy exercises (paginated pp.99-100) ; scrap carrying repeated impressions of an ownership seal (paginated pp.277-278).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 1. Kawaid al-irab, with commentary."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper with brown leather over spine, fore-edge flap, and edges/turn-ins; Type II binding (with flap, now lost) ; board linings in salmon/pink laid paper ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; worked endbands damaged with core of headband exposed, tailband nearly gone ; overall in poor condition with flap entirely lost, significant abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, staining, paper label affixed to upper cover, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper, likely of more than one type ; mainly with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 25-26 mm. apart (horizontal) ; dark cream with some inclusions ; watermarks difficult to discern but include triple mount and fleur de lis above P G G ; another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 23-24 mm. (horizontal) carries three hats watermark ; well-sized and burnished ; some moisture damage (mainly final two quires).', 'Decoration: Some headings, vocalization, glosses, corrections, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; overlining in red ; written area throughout surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Naskh ; bold Turkish hand ; virtually serifless ; slight effect of tilt to the left ; closed and open counters ; kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred ; alif maqṣūrah occasionally mardūdah ; point of final nūn occasionally joined to bowl ; some variatin in line thickness.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 17 V (170), i ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and inserts ; skips two pages between pp.323-324).', 'Explicit: "كفاية لمن تأمله فان التأمل اصل في ذكرك الامور كلها ... قال في اول هذا الكتاب يقتفي متأملها جادة الصواب جعلنا الله واياكم من اهل الجنة والثواب ... امين يا مجيب الدعوات ومفتح الابواب والحمد لله على جزيل نواله والصلوة والسلام على سيدنا محمد واله تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الرافع لقواعد الدين والاسلام والناصب لرايات الهدى الى دار الخلد والسلام ... فان العبد المستمد من فيض فضل العزيز الوهاب محمد ابن سليمان المشهور بكافيجي بين الاصحاب يقول لما رأيت الكتاب المسمى بالاعراب عن قواعد الاعراب للشيخ الامام جمال الدين محمد بن عبد الله بن يوسف ابن هشام ... في غاية حسن الوقع عند ذوي الالباب ونهاية عموم النفع لمن تأمله من الطلاب ولكنه غير مستغن عن شرح يسفر عن وجوه مخدراته من النقاب .. استخرت الله تعالى في ان ارتب له شرحا يذلل ابيان سوارده الصعاب ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of a commentary by al-Kāfiyajī (d.1474) Ibn Hishām's (d.1360) grammatical treatise on inflection and the Arabic sentence."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 120', 'Origin: As appears on p.201, transcription of Sharḥ ashkāl al-taʼsīs likely completed in 878 [1473 or 4]. Paper throughout certainly suggests 15th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Several inserted slips wtih notes, geometric diagrams, etc. (paginated pp.169-170, pp.171-172, pp.181-182, pp.183-184, pp.195-196, pp.217-218).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 148. Al-Mulakhkhas & Ashkal al-tasis." ; "٤٤٨" on tail edge.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather (interesting grain) ; perhaps Type II binding (with flap, though now lost [?]) ; board linings in laid paper over marbled paper ; upper and lower covers bear blind-stamped, scalloped mandorla filled with floral vegetal composition (compare Déroche class. OSv 1) ; sewn mainly in blue thread, two stations, with repaired sections in white thread, four stations ; worked endbands in light blue, in very poor condition and nearly lost ; overall in poor condition with flap entirely lost [?], severe moisture damage, much abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, etc. ; repair to spine in red leather ; ill-fitting and perhaps not original to codex.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 20 laid lines in 22-23 mm. (vertical) ; chain lines (horizontal) grouped in threes with 9-12 mm. between the chains and 47-48 between the groups ; staining and severe moisture damage (often obscuring text) ; occasional repairs.', 'Decoration: Keywords, abbreviations, and some notabilia (side-heads) rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas and overlining in red ink ; numerous diagrams mainly in red ink.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) and naskh ; several hands ; first work supplied in a nastaʻlīq, sparsely pointed, virtually serifless and freely ligatured, with mainly closed counters, effect of words descending to baseline, and elongation of horizontal strokes ; Sharḥ Ashkāl al-taʼsīs in naskh with influence of nastaʻlīq, virtually serifless.', 'Layout: Written in 19-25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 6 V(60), IV-2 (66), III-2 (70), 2 V(90), II (94), III (100), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present (occasionally lacking) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and flyleaves ; skips from p.184 to p.187).', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعل الشمس ضياء والقمر نورا ... وبعد فلا اقسم بمواقع النجوم ... الحمد هو الثناء باللسان على الجميل ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '8. p.203-p.215 : Matn Ashkāl al-taʼsīs / Muḥammad ibn Ashraf al-Samarqandī.', '7. p.202 : [originally blank, now carries diagram, etc.].', '6. p.143-201 : [Sharḥ Ashkāl al-taʼsīs fī ʻilm al-handasah] / Qāḍīʹzādah.', '5. p.140-p.142 : [blank].', '4. p.136-p.139 : [brief treatise].', '3. p.133-135 : [blank].', '2. p.129-p.132 : [assorted tables (jadāwil)].', '1. p.4-p.128 : Sharḥ al-Jighmīnī / Qāḍīʹzādah.', "Fine copy of two commentaries by Mūsá ibn Muḥammad Qāḍīʼzādah al-Rūmī (d. ca. 1436), the first on Maḥmūd ibn Muḥammad al-Jaghmīnī's (d. 1221?) al-Mulakhkhaṣ fī al-hayʼah on astronomy and the latter on Ashkāl al-taʼsīs, selected theorems from Euclid's Elements by Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Ashraf al-Samarqandī (13th cent.). Accompanied by assorted astronomical tables, another brief treatise, and the matn of al-Samarqandī's Ashkāl al-taʼsīs."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 506', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.346b (p.692), copied by ("katabahu...") ʻAbd al-Faqīr. Date of transcription is not specified.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 366" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip) ; on tail-edge "١٦٤".', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather with patches of light brown leather at edges of upper and lower covers and in repairs to spine ; Type II binding (with flap) ; paper pastedowns and flyleaves in rough brown paper ; interior of flap in yellow paper and the same red-brown leather leather ; upper and lower covers each carry a blind-stamped, scalloped (17 lobes) mandorla 52 mm. high (compare Déroche class. NSd 9) accompanied by pendants and a double border consisting of a series of fillets ; three pendants appear on the envelope flap and two on the fore-edge flap ; sewn in red thread, four stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and yellow, immaculate condition ; threads broken in table of contents and final bifolium ; in fair condition with abrasion and typical wear ; repairs.', 'Support: A number of papers appear in the various parts of the codex ; [1] primary paper is an Oriental laid paper (possibly 15th century Egyptian or Persian paper?) with 3/3/2 chainlines, 8-11 mm. between chainlines, 46 mm. between the sets of 3 and 43 between the sets of 3 and 2 ; the laidlines are very closely set and not very distinct ; [2] table of contents supplied in a European laid paper with horizontal chainlines approx. 25 mm. apart and watermark, namely a 6-pointed star approx. 32 mm. high, centered on a chainline, with the letters C and S (?) beneath, each aprrox. 25 mm. high ; [3] initial replacement folia (quire following the table of contents) on a European laid paper with indistinct chainlines and no apparent watermark ; [4] other replacement folia (fourth quire and final three quires) in a European laid paper with chainlines approx. 24 mm. apart and watermark, namely a lion rampant in a shield with a trefoil above and writing beneath, "T O S C O L A N O".', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with mainly overlining appearing in red ; a number of small diagrams appear in the margins of the book ; those on pp.332, 366, and 376 are extremely rudimentary and seem to deal with simple geometrical concepts ; two sets of circles on p.415 and p.416 occupy a section on astronomy, and the somewhat more elaborate and partially rubricated geometrical diagrams on p.458 and p.459 accompany a discussion of optics ; another oblong figure appears on p.466.', 'Script: Naskh ; three Persianate hands ; [1] primary hand is a rather small, neat Persianate naskh, quite casually pointed and unvowelled ; alifs are almost vertical and sans serif ; The dot of the nūn is incorporated to the point of being non-existent ; ʻAlá written with a rightward-pointing descender ; [2] table of contents is in a very casual Persianate naskh, largely unpointed and totally unvowelled ; [3] replacement hand is a late Persianate naskh, pointed, unvowelled, with nūn having the incorporated dot.', 'Layout: Written in 21-25 lines per page (main in 25, replacement folia at beginning in 24, replacement folia close in 21-23) ; frame-ruled (impression of misṭarah evident).', 'Collation: III(6), 1+I (9), 1+II (14), III-1 (19), 16 V(179), VI(191), VII(205), 11 V(315), VI(327), V(337), IV+I (347) ; foliated in red Hindu-Arabic numerals, generally in the top left corner of each recto, begins with ١ on p.17 and ends with ۳۳۸ on p.691 ; obviously done sometime after the glossing and trimming of the ms. ; catchwords present, though many lost to trimming ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب كتبه عبد الفقير"', 'Explicit: "ولكن هذا اخر الكلام من كتاب المواقف ونسأل الله تعالى أن يثبت قلبنا على دينه ولا بزيغه بعد الهداية ويعصمنا عن الغواية ويوقفنا للاقتداء برسول الله واصحابه والتابعين لهم باحسان ويعفو عن طغيان القلم وما لا يخلق [كذا] عنه البشر من السهو والذلل وان يعاملنا بفضله ورحمته انه هو العفو الرحيم قد تمت"', 'Incipit: "ضمن خطبة كتابه الإشارة إلى مقاصد علم الكلام رعاية لبراعة الإستهلال فبسمل اولا يتمنا ثم قال الحمد لله العلى شانه إلى أخره وحاله في ذاته وصفاته وأقعاله فانه جامع لجهات علو الشان "', 'Title from inscription on fol.1a (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine early copy of the commentary (completed in Shawwāl 807 in Samarqand) on Kitāb al-mawāqif fī ʻilm al-kalām, the renowned work on theology by ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Aḥmad ʻAḍūḍ al-Dīn al-Ījī (d. 756/1355). Description provided by Noah Gardiner.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 283', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.227a (p.453), copied (حرره) by Muḥammad Taqī in the village of Ashtān [?] (در قصبه اشتان). Transcription finished 7th Ramaḍān 1265 [ca. 27 July 1849].', 'Accompanying materials: Slip of laid paper with writing ; on one side in black ink, what appears to be a list of books, works ; on the other side in red and black ink, notes on grammar.', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in red leather with spine, edges / turn-ins, doublures and doublure hinges in rich, green-blue (teal) leather (leather faced and edged framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) though not flush with this text block ; two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; upper and lower covers bear central scalloped mandorla and pendants, blind-stamped with recessed onlays in green (reminiscent of oxidized "gold" paint) and traces of gold paint on floral design within ; border composed of a series of s-shaped stamps, gold painted and flanked by gold fillets ; sewn in green thread, two stations ; fine chevron endbands in purple and green ; in good condition with some minor abrasion, wear at corners, staining, etc.', 'Support: Machine wove paper of a few different types, all fairly thick, well-burnished ; watermarks / countermarks include Cyrillic "Г г С" (large letters in script, see p.8, 16, 24, 122, etc.), possible Cyrillic "К Я" (in p.158 etc.), Cyrillic "A Б" (p.202, 402, 404, 432, 442, etc. and cf. example in Klepikov p.38 dated 1851), and possible numerals 1 8 (p.424 etc.) 4 6 (p.400, 420 etc.) suggesting year 1846 ; embossed mark in p.233, 247, 322, 447, etc. (oval with only trace of border inscription, etc.) ; some staining, moisture damage, ink smudges ; tacky ink has resulted in blocking in some places.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) on fol.1b (p.2) consisting of narrow rectangular panel with cartouche bearing the basmalah surmounted by scalloped w-shaped piece with swirling floral vegetal design in light blue, pink, orange, red, pistachio and white, on a field of gold with lapis lazuli accents ; above the piece stand vertical stalks (tigh) in blue ; the piece is framed in a well consisting of a heavy red band with scalloped decoration in white, flanked by bands of pistachio and gold ; text throughout is ruled in a simple frame consisting of a narrow gold band outlined in black fillets with an outermost blue fillet and at some distance in the margin a second blue fillet ; text rubricated with section headings, overlinings, etc. in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; small, elegant Persianate hand in medium line ; sans serif with characteristic descent of words to baseline, superscripting of final letters and words, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; single column divided to two columns to set off poetry ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 26 IV (216), III+1 (223), II (227), ii ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, in Arabic and Persian, reads: "تمت الکتاب بعون الله الملک الوهاب بتاریخ یوم هفتم شهر رمضان المبارک سنه ۱۲۶٥ هزار و دویست و شصت و پنج هجری در قصبه اشتان حرره محمد تقی" followed by scribal verses.', 'Explicit: "منم از قاضیان مشار الیه وان دگر کیر ماست عز علیه"', 'Incipit: "مقدری نه بالت بقدرت مطلق کند ز شکل بخاری چو کنبد ازرق ..."', 'Title from fore-edge.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of collected poems (mainly his qaṣāyid and muqaṭṭaʻāt without systematic arrangement) of Awḥad al-Dīn Anvarī (d.1189 or 90).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 629', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest 16th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 217" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in dark tan leather ; epigraphic stamps on interior of envelope flap ; sewn in heavy cream thread, two stations ; enbands mainly gone though traces of tailband remain ; overall in fair condition with some staining, abrasion, lifting and losses of leather (particularly at spine), fore edge flap quite ill-fitting (small), negative draw in upper cover, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper of several types ; one type with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and occasional chain lines (vertical) faintly visible spaced about 17 mm. apart, dense, thick and sturday, medium cream to beige in color, well-burnished ; another type with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines (vertical) grouped in threes with 6-8 mm. between chains and 53 mm. between groups (see p.180, etc.) ; still another type with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and no chain lines visible, thin though sturdy, burnished ; leather burn (of flap design) in verso of final leaf (p.474).', 'Decoration: Keywords and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) and naskh ; two main hands ; opening hand (through close of opening section on p.303) nastaʻlīq (talik), quite elegant, virtually serifless, compact but quite elongated in the horizontal, with pointing in distinct dots ; second section (from p.304 on) in naskh, fine Persianate or Turkish hand, quite rounded with some sweeping descenders, some exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, occasional effect of tilt to the right, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, point of final nūn set at opening of bowl, freely ligatured.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 18 IV(144), III (150), 9 IV(222), III (228), IV (236) ; chiefly quaternions ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals in the upper outer corner of the opening recto of each quire ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and mistakenly skips two pages between p.315 and p.316 and skips ahead from p.145 to p.150).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," rectangular, reads "ونجز الفراغ من تأليفه اواسط شوال من سنة ثلث وثمانمائة وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل نعم المولى ونعم النصير"', 'Explicit: "لانه جزء من علم البلاغة كما صرح به فيما مر وحققه ههنا وهذا آخر ما يسرنا الله تع بمنه ولطفه من كشف فوائد هذا العلم ونظم فرائده ونسأل الله تع ان ينفع به المسترشدين وان يجعله ذخرا لنا يوم الدين"', 'Incipit: "نحمدك اللهم على ما هديتنا اليه من دقائق المعاني في بدائع البيان واطلعتنا عليه من حقائق المثاني في بذرائع البرهان ... وبعد فقد طالما جال في صدري ودار في خلدي ان ارتب للقسم الثالث من مفتاح العلوم شرحا يدلل [؟] على صابه ..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of al-Sayyid al-Sharīf ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad al-Jurjānī's (d.1413) commentary on the third part of Miftāḥ al-‘ulūm by al-Sakkākī (d.1228 or 29, on rhetoric (ʻilm al-maʻānī wa-al-bayān). The commentary is better known as al-Miṣbāḥ fī sharḥ al-Miftāḥ."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 216', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.434, copied for himself by Mīrzā Jān al-Shīrāzī, perhaps Ḥabīb Allāh Mīrzā Jān al-Shīrāzī al-Baghanawī [or al-Baghandī] (d.1586), with transcription completed in 985 [1577 or 1578].', 'Former shelfmark: "328 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "10" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.3).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; upper and lower doublures in brown leather with simple gold-tooled border and central floral motif ; upper and lower covers bear large blind-stamped and gold-painted scalloped mandorla (vegetal composition compare Déroche class. OAi 8 or 9) with pendants and corner pieces, all surrounded by gold-painted accents and accompanied by a tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn in light pink thread, two stations ; worked endbands in light pink and cream, intact ; overall in fair condition with slight abrasion and staining, some lifting and splitting of leather at spine and foreedge flap, envelope flap detaching from foreedge flap, etc.', 'Support: non-European (Persian) laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. and sporadic chain lines ; well-burnished and quite sturdy though crisp ; front flyleaf in European laid paper ; some pest damage.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.4 consisting of rectangular piece surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) ; rectangular piece carries gold-filled cartouche with pendants and flanking accent pieces on a background of lapis lazuli with swirling vegetal decoration in gold, white, yellow, lavender, red and blue ; scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) echos the composition of the rectangular piece with swirling vegetal design mainly in black, blue, and lavender on a field of gold with accents in yellow, red, and blue green, all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by frame consisting of a series of narrow gold, blue-green, and red bands with outermost blue fillet (frame also forms the well of the headpiece) ; elsewhere written area surrounded by frame consisting of gold band and black fillets ; some keywords, some abbreviations, and occasional marginalia rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; most keywords chyrsographed.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Persianate hand ; virtually serifless ; effect of tilt to the left ; kāf mashqūqah preferred ; hamzat al-waṣl occasionally marked ; pointing in distinct dots, with two dots often oriented vertically (one above the other) rather than horizontally ; mainly closed counters ; curvilinear descenders, some sweeping ; rightward descenders tapered ; freely ligatured with final hāʼ often assimilated with preceding dāl or rāʼ ; final words/letters of line often superscript ; glosses in naskh-nastaʻlīq.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V-1 (9), 16 V(169), IV (177), 4 V(217), I+1-1 (219) ; chiefly quinions ; first two leaves of opening quire glued together ; final leaf left blank and the two leaves preceding that are glued together ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf and skips two pages each between pp.93-94 and pp.181-182).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "كتبه الفقير اليه تعالى الشهير بميرزا جان الشيرازي لنفسه غفر الله له ولوالديه في سنة ۹۸٥"', 'Explicit: "وقد يجعل هو نفسه التكملة وفي هذا شبه تنزل عن حقيقة الجزئية الى كونه الجمال له والكمال والاستمداد في اللغة طلب المراد يقال استمددت الامير وتعديته الى مفعولين لتضمين معنى الطلب والسؤال والله تعالى المسؤل لتيسير الآمال والمشكور على ما افاض من النوال وله الحمد على كل حال تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب"', 'Incipit: "خير خبر يوشح به صدر الكلام واحسن حديث يرشح لمقتضى المقام حمدا لله الذي خلق الانسان علمه البيان واتم له الاحسان فالهمه التبيان جعل فيه الفصاحة مفتاحا لفتح باب النجاح والدراية مصباحا للتهدي الى اسباب الفلاح', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of al-Taftāzānī's commentary on the third part of Miftāḥ al-ʻulūm of al-Sakkākī on ʻIlm al-maʻānī wa-al-bayān, apparently copied by Ḥabīb Allāh Mīrzā Jān al-Shīrāzī (d.1586)."])

en: (count: ['Contains astronomical diagrams.', 'Text rubricated in red; substantial interlinear notes in hand of copyist.', 'For dated copies of this text, see Mich. Isl. Mss. 754, 805,4, and 817,1.', 'Commentary on al-Jighmīnī\'s Mulakhkhaṣ fī al-hayʾah, "a treatise on theoretical astronomy ... compiled in 618 H [1221]." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 158.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Three crescents. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Contains geometrical diagrams.', 'In Maghribī script.', 'Text rubricated; marginal notes and corrections in Maghribī script in another hand (?).', "For another commentary on al-Jighmīnī's Mulakhkhaṣ, by Qāḍī Zādah, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 754.", 'Commentary on the Mulakhkhaṣ fī al-hayʾah, a treatise on theoretical astronomy by Maḥmūd ibn Muḥammad al-Jighmīnī compiled in 1221. David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 150.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 643', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, hand, etc. would suggest early to mid 19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.1-2) -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From \'title page\' (p.5), label on \'spine\' edge of enclosure, and interior of enclosure flap "IL 199" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', "Binding: Unbound gatherings housed in custom enclosure resembling a sort of flexible slipcase or pouch ; enclosure consists of upper and lower boards covered in block-printed paper (repeated floral motifs in pink and black on a yellow ground) and lined in recycled printed 'waste' with limp tan leather joining the two boards and covering the head, spine and fore edge ; a sturdy flap (consisting of tail edge flap, carrying a title inscription, and envelope flap) with leather pull covers the tail and slips inside the enclosure ; no evidence that textblock was ever sewn (no stations, threads, etc.) ; overall in somewhat poor condition with lifting and losses of leather, abrasion, staining, delamination of boards, etc.", 'Support: European laid paper of two main types (possibly associated via the same maker) ; one type with 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27-28 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of crescent moon with face in shield (see p.30, 39, etc.) and "T S" (see p.14, 15, etc.) ; another type with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of three crescents with faces (81 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.8, 21, etc.) and "L A F" under double-headed eagle with wings spread and dagger in each talon (see p.6, 12, 17, 23, etc. and compare nos. 1054 and 1058 in Nikolaev, Watermarks of the Ottoman Empire, vol.1 ; see also p.88 in Walz, "The paper trade of Egypt and the Sudan in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries") ; all light cream in color, well-burnished to glossy and fairly crisp though sturdy ; staining and tears (more wear at head edge).', 'Decoration: Text being commented upon rubricated ; written area surrounded by red double rule-border.', 'Script: Naskh ; bold, elegant Egyptian [?] hand ; mainly serifless though small head-serif appears on occasional free-standing alif, slight effect of tilt to the left, elongation of horizontal strokes, casually pointed with two and three dots often strokes rather than distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ, quite rounded with curvilinear descenders.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 14 V(140), III (146) ; almost exclusively quinions ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals accompanied by ك (upper outer corner of the recto of the opening leaf of each quire) ; catchwords present (verso of each leaf) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Explicit: "هذا الموضع الغنا عنا اي بلغ الغاية يريد عمرو ابن هند وانه شهد عناهم هذا اليوم تمت قصيدة الحارث بحمد الله وعونه واختتمت القصائد السبع برواية الامام الزوزني رحمه الله تعالى وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين وصلواته وسلامه على خير خلقه محمد واله اجمعين قال القاضي الامام السيد ابو عبد الله الحسين ابن احمد الزوزني رحمه الله هذا شرح القصائد السبع امليته على حد الايجاز والاختصار على حسب ما اقترح علي مستعينا بالله على اتمامه وعليه توكلت ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.5).", 'Ms. gatherings.', 'Fine copy of the commentary on al-Muʻallaqāt, the renowned collection of pre-Islamic Arabic poems, generally numbered at seven.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 552', 'Origin: As appears in colophon (fol.277a), transcription completed by ("tamma hādhā al-kitāb ʻalá yad...") Muḥammad ibn Shukr [?] ibn Muʻallá Shukrlak [?] al-Dabrī [?] in the months of 716 [1316 or 17].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From front flyleaf "IL 211C" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red textured cloth with brown leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in green-blue wove paper ; spine gold-stamped with title and author "شرح القدوري للاقطع" as well as gold accents flanking raised bands ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, somewhat indistinct) and grouped chain lines occasionally visible, mainly grouped in threes with 11-14 mm. between chains and 38 mm. between groups (see final leaf fol.277/p.254) cloudy formation, obvious inclusions, quite thick and sturdy, well-burnished ; added table of contents at opening supplied on folded piece of European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated titlepiece (badly damaged but repaired) in gold, blue and white with black outlining on fol.1a, upper rectangular panel carries title and author, text carried in medallion (shamsah) of lower panel difficult to make out ; textual dividers in red ; section headings, pen flourishes above قال، etc. rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; two elegant Syrian or Egyptian hands ; opening hand serifless with elongation of horizontal strokes and broad, sweeping descenders, pointing in distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah often pointed as yāʼ ; hand changes at fol.191a, much more rounded and freely ligatured.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page in the first two quires and thereafter 25-27 lines per page ; impression of ruling board evident.', 'Collation: I (2), 15 V (152), IV (160), 3 V (190), III (196), I (198), 7 V (268), IV+1 (277) ; chiefly quinions ; lacks catchwords ; early quires (2nd through 19th) are numbered with ordinals written in Arabic (ثاني، ثالث، رابع، إلخ) in the upper corner of the outer margin on the recto of the first leaf of each quire ; foliation with Hindu-Arabic numerals (curious inverted nine) in black ink begins with "١" on second leaf, skips 222, hence final count is off ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Dedication: "تم النصف الثاني من كتاب شرح القدوري للاقطع سنة ست عشرة وسبعمائة بتقديم الشيخ المهملة [?] وهو على مذهب الامام الاعظم المحرم ابي حنيفة النعمان غفر الله له ..."', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "تم هذا الكتاب على يد محمد بن شكر [؟] بن معلى شكرلك [...؟] الدبرى في شهور سنة ست عشرة وسبعمائة وهو يحمد الله ويصلي على نبيه محمد واله ويسلم ويسأل غفران الذنوب وستر العقوب وكشف الكروب امين"', 'Explicit: "وقدرها دائق ونصف وعلى هذا القياس تعمل جميع من [...?] المسائل"', 'Incipit: "بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم كتاب النكاح قال الشيخ ابو نصر احمد بن محمد البغدادي رحمة عليه النكاح في اللغة حقيقة ..."', 'Title from inscription on recto of front flyleaf.', 'Ms. codex.', "Second volume of al-Aqṭaʻ's commentary on Mukhtaṣar al-Qudūrī, a compendium of Ḥanafī law. Added table of contents at opening of codex."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 920', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.399, transcription of Kitāb Asrār al-āyāt (and likely preceding work as well), completed 8 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1358 corresponding to 18 January 1940 and 9 Ṭūbah [1656]. As appears in colophon on p.669, transcription of Uthūlūjiyā Arīsṭū completed 7 Jumādá I 1354, corresponding to 7 August 1935. All likely transcribed in Egypt, and eventually bound together for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974). Several of the included works likely copied from printed editions.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 69', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "شرح زين العابدين | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition though with acid burn where pressure sensitive tape has been applied to repair front flyleaf.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper of at least two types.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact, modern hand in a thin to bold line (line thickness changes) ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 26 lines per page.', 'Collation: Pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: [Kitāb Asrār al-āyāt] "تم هذا الكتاب في فجر اليوم الثامن من شهر ذي الحجة ١٣٥٨ هجرية الموافق للثامن عشر من شهر يناير ١٩٤٠ ميلادية و التاسع من شهر طوبة قبطية والحمد لله اولا واخرا ..." ; [Kitāb Uthūlūjiyā Arīsṭū] "Scribal," reads "تم في يوم الاربعاء سابع جمادى الاولى س ١٣٥٤ الموافق سابع اغسطس ١٩٣٥ والحمد لله اولا واخرا وبداء واختتاما"', 'Incipit: [Muqaddimat al-nāshir] "الحمد لله وزان علمه وكفى والصلاة على عباده الذين اصطفى وبعد فان الرسالة الموسومة بالعرشية ..." [Sharḥ al-ʻArshīyah]"شرح الرسالة الموسومة بالعرشية لخاتم الحكماء المتألهين ملا اسماعيل الاصفهاني ... بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الحمد لله الذي خلقنا بقدرته ثم هدانا الى سبيل معرفته ... وبعد فيقول اقل الخليقة جرما واكثرها جرما العبد الذليل ... محمد اسماعيل بن السميع الاصفهاني ... اني لما رأيت الرسالة الشريفة الموسومة بالحكمة العرشية للمولى الفاضل ... محمد بن ابراهيم المعروف بصدر الشيرازي ..." [Asrār al-āyāt] "هذا كتاب اسرار الايات لامام المتألهين ... نحمدك اللهم يا من تحيرت في بيداء كبريائه الالباب ..." ; [Muqaddimat al-nāshir] "الحمد لله وزان علمه وكفى والصلاة على عباده الذين اصطفى وبعد فان الرسالة الموسومة بالعرشية ..." ; [Sharḥ al-ʻArshīyah] "الحمد لله الذي خلقنا بقدرته ثم هدانا الى سبيل معرفته ..." ; [Uthūlūjiyā Arīsṭū] "مقدمة جدير بكل ساع لمعرفة الغاية التي هو عائد اليها سعيا منبعثا ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from heading on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.566-p.669 : Hādhā Kitāb Uthūlūjiyā (Thuyūlūjiyā) Arīsṭū fī al-fann al-rubūbī min funūn Mā baʼda al-ṭabīʻah.', '3. p.399-565 : Sharḥ al-ʻArshīyah li-Mullā Ṣadrā / Mullā Ismāʻīl al-Iṣfahānī.', '2. p.220-p.399 : Hādhā Kitāb Asrār al-āyāt / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Shīrāzī.', '1. p.1-p.220: Sharḥ al-Risālah al-mawsūmah bi-al-ʻArshīyah / Muḥammad Ismāʻīl ibn al-Sumayʻ al-Iṣfahānī.', 'Careful copy of the commentary by Muḥammad Ismāʻīl ibn al-Sumayʻ al-Iṣfahānī (d.1860 or 61) on al-Ḥikmah al-ʻarshīyah, the popular work on knowledge of God and eschatology by Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī (d.1640), apparently followed by Asrār al-āyāt, also by Mullā Ṣadrā, another copy of the opening commentary, and Kitāb Uthūlūjiyā (Thuyūlūjiyā) Arīsṭū (i.e. the Theology of Aristotle or Theologia Aristotelis, see Isl. Ms. 910).'])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated; marginal notes and corrections in hand of copyist.', 'Date of late 19th cent. based on use of wood-pulp paper.', "Commentary on Sibṭ al-Māridīnī's treatise on the sine quadrant, for which see Mich. Isl. Ms. 749,2."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 619', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.390, copied by Ḥaṣan ibn Ṣāliḥ ibn Aḥmad, in al-Madrasah al-Ḥājjīyah [?] (المدرسة الحاجية) in the buqʻah (بقعة) of Bitlis (بدليس) [?] with transcription (tansīkh) completed 27 Dhū al-Qaʻdah 930 [ca. 26 September 1524].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 202" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark teal cloth ; Western-style binding (not original) ; board linings in wove paper ; resewn and very tightly bound ; stuck-on endbands in blue and white stripe ; overall in fairly good condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of cloth, etc.', "Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 30-32 mm. apart (horizontal), and bull's head watermark (pole and five-petalled flower above, see p.10, 16, etc.), dense and sturdy though crisp, well-burnished.", 'Decoration: Keywords and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red ; text being commented upon (matn al-Shāfiyah) overlined in red.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Eastern Turkish [?] hand ; virtually serifless and quite rounded with curvilinear descenders (many sweeping), slight effect of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, freely ligatured, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf) with shaqq sweeping upward.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: Chiefly quinions ; now so tightly bound, virtually impossible to discern original gatherings without damaging or disbinding ; leaf carrying incipit page missing ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "فرغت يدا احقر عباد الله الصمد حسن بن صالح بن احمد عن تنسيخ هذه النسخة الچارپرديدية ضحوة يوم الثلثاء السابع والعشرين من ذي القعدة سنة ثلثين وتسعمائة ببقعة بدليس [؟] صينت من آفات التلبيس في المدرسة الحاجية على صاحبها الرحمة م"', 'Explicit: "بمعناها في الغاية والانتهاء ومن الله البداية واليه النهاية"', 'Incipit: "لم يترك في حوزة المكارم السنية مكانا لالا وحق له قول من قال لقد ذلت سبل المعاني وفاق الخلق طرا بالبيان"', 'Title from inscription on interior of upper cover.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine (though acephalous) copy of al-Jārabardī's (d.1346) commentary on Ibn al-Ḥājib’s (d. 1249) celebrated manual of morphology (ṣarf or taṣrīf), al-Shāfīyah."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1034', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.225b, copied by Ismāʻīl ibn Muḥammad Riḍā al-Fashkalī [al-Qashkalī ?]. Transcription ("katabahu...") begun first of Jumādá I 1073 [ca. 12 December 1662] and finished in Dhū al-Qaʻdah 1074 [May-June 1664].', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 183 ; from spine label "۲۸[?]".', 'Binding: Thin pasteboards (very flexible) faced in red textured paper with purple paper over cloth on spine and and brown cloth at corners (half-bound); Type III binding (without flap); board linings in laid paper with single chain lines spaced roughly 26 mm. apart, laid lines spaced roughly 8 laid lines per cm.; what remains of spine label bears a portion of a former shelfmark; sewn in white thread, two stations, now also stab sewn; overall in somewhat poor condition with paper covering spine ripped and detaching, abrasion, staining, etc. ; remains whole and well-affixed to text block despite significant wear.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with laid lines running vertically, spaced roughly 9 laid lines per cm. ; some thin with many undissolved fibers, other heavy with many undissolved fibers; if chain lines are present they are very difficult to see clearly and measure.', 'Decoration: Notabilia (side heads) rubricated ; overlining and occasional textual dividers in the form of discs and the numeral khamsah "۵" in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Turkish hand ; essentially serifless (though with occasional serif on lām of lām alif ligature), kāf mashqūqah preferred, tail of lām short and flattened, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots, some sweeping descenders, gentle effect of inclination to the left ; marginalia in several hands, including some bearing the influence of nastaʻlīq / talik.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 28 IV (224), I (226), i ; almost exclusively quaternions; a type of quire or section numbering appears on the verso of the first leaf of each quire beginning from the third but with "الثاني"; catchwords present; pagination in red pencil, very large Hindu-Arabic numerals, is completely unreliable and inaccurate - first mistakenly repeats ۱٢٩, then continues through ٢٢٢ off by one page, abruptly stops then resumes at what is actually p.234 (fol.117b) with "١٣۴" (i.e., off by one hundred pages) then immediately repeats "١٣٦" by mistake and then repeats "١٦۴" by mistake; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals continues through fol.180 only, but is fully accurate; pagination in pencil, Western numerals supplied during collation by cataloguer.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads: "كتبه المذنب اسماعيل بن محمد رضا الفشكلي عفي عنهما ابتدء في غرة جمادى الاول سنة 1073 فرغ في ... شهر ذي القعدة سنة 1074 تم تم تم"', 'Explicit: "وذلك لقولهم اليك وعليك واما حتى ... على الى والله تعالى اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والماب وصلى الله على محمد النبي الامي العربي واله الاطياب وسلم تسلميا"', 'Incipit: "رب وفق لاكماله بحق محمد واله اما بعد حمد الله تعالى والصلوة على محمد وعترته المعصومين فقد عزمت على ان اشرح مقدمة ابن الحاجب في التصريف والخط وابسط الكلام في شرحها كما في اختها بعين [كذا, بدل بعض] البسط فان اكثر الشراح قد اقتصروا على شرح مقدمة الاعراب وهذا مع قرب التصريف من الاعراب في مساس الحاجة اليه ومع كونهما من جنس واحد بعيد من الصواب وعلى الله المعول في ان يوفقني لاتمامه بمنه وكرمه وبالتوسل بمن انا في مقدس حرمه عليه من الله ازكى السلام وعلى اولاده العز [أو الغر؟] الكرام قال المصنف تولى الله مكافاته..."', 'Title from inscriptions on "added title page" and fol.1a.', 'Ms. codex.', "Commentary of Raḍī al-Dīn al-Astarābādhī (d. 686 or 8/1287 or 9) on Ibn al-Ḥājib's (d. 646/1249) celebrated manual of morphology, al-Shāfīyah."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 850', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, etc. would suggest 17th century ; dated seal impression can suggest only a very rough terminus ante quem of 1765.', 'Accompanying materials: Slip with description and price of this manuscript cut from a seller\'s catalog "[ARABIC MANUSCRIPT]. ATTAYI. Divan, or Collection of poems. 84 leaves, double column, headings and titles in solid gold, each poem and page within heavily gilt borders, 2 \'unwans in blue and gold. 20 by 11.2 cm., 12mo, contemporary goatskin. Arabia, xviii century. $17.50 Fine calligraphic example, charmingly executed. On the last blank leaf is a detailed flowered ornamental pencil outline in prepared for the illuminator, of interest as showing the method of work."', 'Former shelfmark: "46 . 47" in black ink on cover label.', 'Binding: Pasteboards (thin) covered in brown leather once edged in black leather (see traces on lower cover) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings (doublures) in once marbled paper (mainly pink, yellow, etc.) ; upper and lower covers carry tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps, originally in gold over black leather, now lost from many areas ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, fairly good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, moisture damage, lifting of leather, etc. ; spine repair in black leather (overlaping flanges visible).', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (mainly vertical but occasionally horizontal) and occasional chain lines visible, crisp and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished to glossy, some leaves tinted pink or yellow ; flyleaves in European laid paper ; staining and tidelines.', 'Decoration: Splendid illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of Divan-ı Atayi on p.6 consisting of rectangular piece with small gold cartouches carrying the title "ديوان عطايى" in black surrounded by swirling arabesques with floral accents in gold, light blue, and black on a lapis lazuli / cobalt ground, bordered in heavy gold band with delicate floral vegetal pattern in blue and black as well as narrower blue and gold bands defined by black fillets, entire piece surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; another exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of Divan-ı Nizâmî on p.72 consisting of rectangular piece carrying the title "ديوان نظامى" in black surrounded by delicate swirling arabesques with floral accents in gold, black, and light blue on grounds of gold and lapis lazuli / cobalt, entire piece bordered in a narrow gold band defined by black fillets and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area throughout surrounded by a gold frame defined by black fillets ; keywords and headings chrysographed.', 'Script: Naskh ; compact, bold Turkish hand ; partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on occasional ascenders (even free-standing alif), effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, freely ligatured, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots, with three dots represented by a c-shaped stroke.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page with written area divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, IV (8), V (18), IV (26), V (36), IV (44), V (54), IV (62), V (72), IV (80), II (84), i ; alternating quinions and quaternions ; leaves between the two works (pp.70-71) and at close (pp.171-172) ruled but left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Incipit: [Divan-ı Atayi] "يينه عزم رزم قلدى سرور خاور كنش كم ديار هنده چكدى صبحدم لشكر كنش" ; [Divan-ı Nizâmî] "يا اشرف البرية يا سيد الوري اعلى الاله ذاتك قدرا ومنزلا "', "Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on 'title page' (p.5).", 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.171-p.172 : [blank].', '3. p.72-p.170 : Divan-ı Nizâmî / Karamanlı Nizâmî.', '2. p.70-p.71 : [blank].', '1. p.6-p.69 : Divan-ı Atayi / Nevizade Atayi Ataullah bin Yahya.', 'Elegant copy of the Turkish dīvāns of two Ottoman poets, Nevizade Atayi Ataullah bin Yahya (d.1635) and Karamanlı Nizâmî (Şeyh Nizamettin b. Veliettin of Karaman, fl. 15th cent.).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 914', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 63', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "شرح فصوص الحكم | لبالى افندى | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper of two types, one slightly darker in color, in two different sizes i.e. opening through p.402 sized 312 x 212 mm., p.403 to close sized 302 x 205 mm.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, modern hand in a medium to bold line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 26 lines per page.', 'Collation: Pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly repeats pp.65-66) ; occasional repetition of final word on right-hand leaf (verso) on recto of following leaf.', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله على دين الاسلام وعلى توفيق الايمان والاحسان والصلاة على محمد عليه السلام وعلى آله العظام واصحابه الكرام الحمد لله منزل الحكم على قلوب الكلم لما انزل الله تع الحكم على قلب الشيخ المصنف ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', '2. p.682-p.685 : Jawāhir al-nuṣūṣ fī ḥall kalimāt al-Fuṣūṣ [excerpt] / al-Nābulusī.', '1. p.2-p.682 : Sharḥ al-Shaykh Bālī Afandī ʻalá Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam / Bali Efendi.', "Careful copy of the commentary by Bali Efendi (death date given as 970/1553 in 'title page' inscription and in GAL) upon Ibn ʻArabī's celebrated Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam, a collection of aphorisms summarizing the teaching of 28 prophets from Adam to Muḥammad, followed by a brief excerpt from ʻAbd al-Ghanī ibn Ismāʻīl al-Nābulusī’s (d.1731) commentary on the same, entitled Jawāhir al-nuṣūṣ fī ḥall kalimāt al-Fuṣūṣ."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 27', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; paper suggests 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Slip of modern (acidic) notepaper with notes in black ink between pp.12-13 (not paginated).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 24 Sharh Kitab al-shifa."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather (goat?) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in gold-flecked, mustard-colored laid paper over green linen lining ; upper and lower covers bear blind-stamped and gold-painted scalloped mandorla filled with floral vegetal composition (compare Déroche class. Nsd7) with pendants, gold-painted accents and tooled border ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; endbands in cream, head intact, tail mostly intact ; in fair condition ; binding and cover are sound ; some tide-lines from water-damage in margins of pages ; linen lining used for repair over leather over fore-edge and spine.', 'Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 22 mm. apart (horizontal) ; watermarks include lion passant holding flower/leaf (see p.12, 19, 33, etc.) and eagle (in profile, with crown on the head) within scrollwork (see p.15, 27, 45, etc.).', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.4, consisting of w-shaped piece filled with swirling floral motif in gold, green, blue, orange, and red set in a well of pink and blue bands separated by gold fillets ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by a frame consisting of wide gold band with outermost red fillet, elsewhere text surrounded by red rule-border ; textual dividers in the form of red circles (resembling ه or numeral khamsah) ; overlining in red ; chapter and section headings rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Turkish hand ; mainly serifless, though occasional left-sloping head-serif appears on lām of definite article, alif of lām alif ligature, etc. ; mainly closed counters ; kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred ; very slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more apparent) ; dot of final nūn very often assimilated with bowl ; glosses in several other hands.', 'Layout: Written in 33 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, VI (12), 18 V(192), VI (204), 11 V (314), V+3 (327), 2 IV(343), V+1 (354), 5 V(404), V+1 (415), IV (423), i ; chiefly quinions ; final leaf left blank ; lacks proper catchwords, but last word of final line on the verso of each leaf is usually repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during digitization ; skips two pages each between pp.45-46 and pp.99-100, drops from p.100 to p.61, skips ahead from p.378 to p.380 and from p.381 to p.383, drops from p.433 to p.424).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," rectangular, reads: "فرغ مؤلفه رحمه [؟] سلفه اوسط رمضان المبارك عام احد عشر بعد الالف من الهجرة النبوية الى المدينة السكينة و ذلك بمكة المكرمة الامينة و انا الفقير الى بر ربه الباري علي بن سلطان محمد القاري الحنفي عاملهما الله بلطفه الخفي و كرمه الوفي و من احسن ما نظم في تحسين هذا الكتاب ما قاله بعض اولى الالباب من الاصحاب ... اصاب الله جامعه عياضا جنات الخلد فهي له جزاء و زاد محبه شرفا و فضلا و بلغه المهيمن ما شاء تم تم تم"', 'Explicit: "فعذب ماؤها بعد ما كان مالحا فهو سبحانه حسبنا و نعم الوكيل ربنا و نعم الشفيع نبينا ونسأل الله دوام العافية وتوفيق تمام الطاعة وحسن الخاتمة والحمد لله اولا واخرا ... برحمتك يا ارحم الراحمين امين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله اللذى انزل القرآن شفاء لما في الصدور و هدى و رحمة للمؤمنين و شفى به من مكان اشفى على شفائر جهنم من الكافرين و الصلوة و السلام على سيد المرسلين ... اما بعد فيقول افقر العباد الى كرم ربه الباري علي بن سلطان محمد القاري لما رايت كتاب الشفاء في شمائل صاحب الاصطفاء اجمع ما صنف في بابه مجملا في الاستيفاء لعدم امكان الوصول الى انتهاء الاستقصاء قصدت ان اخدمه بشرح يشرح ما يتعلق به من تحقيق الاعراب و البناء ... قال بسم الله الرحمن الريم اقتداء بالكلام المجيد"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from opening on p.4.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of al-Qārī al-Harawī's commentary on ʻIyāḍ ibn Mūsá's treatise on the devotional obligations of Muslims towards the Prophet. Two volumes in one. Description provided mainly by Sarah Mirza."])

en: (count: ['On pp. [1-2], illuminated ʻunwān and gilded borders in Turkish style; text rubricated and enclosed in gold borders; marginal notes; edges gilded in foliate patterns.', 'Date in colophon: sanat 1252 ghurrat Ṣ[afar] [i.e. 18 May 1836].', '"On the condition of the dead and the graves." Cataloging by William Hoyt Worrell, 1925.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 143', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.121, copied by Aḥmad ibn Ṭūrsī [?]. Transcription finished Dhū al-Qaʻdah 1045 [?] [April-May 1636]. Appears that copyist originally entered خمسون then added اربعون above it.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 147. Commentary on al-Tashrif."', 'Binding: Serving as a wrapper, pasteboards covered in laid paper (likely originally marbled, compare flap) with spine, fore-edge flap and edges/turn-ins in black leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; originally housed a different textblock ; current textblock sewn in pink thread, two stations but simply set in to cover without attachment to spine or endleaves ; overall in poor condition with much abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, staining, etc. ; repairs in dark brown leather ; housed in envelope.', 'Support: European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 30 mm. apart (horizontal) ; crown-star-crescent watermark, accompanied by countermark of "G V" surmounted by trefoil ; thick, sturdy and well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of three dots.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Turkish hand ; virtually serifless, though occasional head-serifs appear irregularly on alif, lām, etc. ; effect of tilt to the left ; many open counters ; rounded ; kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 6 V(60), iii ; entirely quinions ; added leaves from textblock previously housed in this cover ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes leaves carried from textblock previously housed in this cover).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "تم الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب رحمة الله عليه [كذا] من عبد الضعيف الفقير الحقير الى رب الكريم احمد ابن طورسى رحمة الله عليه ذي القعدنك اوندردنجى كنى ثلا وقتنده تم الكتاب تاريخ سنه خمسه وخمسون [اربعون] والف"', 'Explicit: "والفرق بين المصدر في النوع من هذا القسم القرينة [؟]"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله على جزيل نعمائه السابقة واشكره على جميل الائه [؟] المتلاحقة ... وبعد يقول اضعف عباد الله واحوجهم الى رحمته يحيى [؟] الملقب بالامام المعظم ابن ابراهيم ابن عبد السلام الزنجاني لما [رايت؟] قلوب الطلاب من محصلى ابناء زماننا مائلة بهذا المختصر في علم الصرف المنسوب الى المولى المعظم ... عز الملة والدين عماد الاسلام والمسلمين عبد الوهاب ابراهيم الزنجاني ... اردت ان [اشرحه] شرحا فائقا ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '5. p.124-p.126 : [brief excerpt from Sharḥ Ādāb al-Birkawī] / al-Qāzābādī.', '4. p.122-123 : [originally left blank].', '3. p.4-p.121 : [Sharḥ al-Taṣrīf al-ʻIzzī] / Yaḥyá ibn Ibrāhīm ibn ʻAbd al-Salām al-Zanjānī.', '2. p.3 : [blank].', '1. p.2 : [brief excerpt from Ḥāshiyat al-uṣūl wa-ghāshiyat al-fuṣūl ʻalá al-Muqaddimāt al-arbaʻ] / al-Qāzābādī.', "Fine copy of Yaḥyá ibn Ibrāhīm ibn ʻAbd al-Salām al-Zanjānī's commentary on ʻAzz al-Dīn ʻAbd al-Wahhāb ibn Ibrāhīm al-Zanjānī's Kitāb al-Taṣrīf. Wrapped in a cover originally affixed to a textblock containing at least two different works of Abū al-Nāfiʻ Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Isḥāq al-Qāzābādī (d.1749), namely a ḥāshiyah on al-Muqaddimāt al-arbaʻ, a portion of ʻUbayd Allāh ibn Masʻūd al-Maḥbūbī's (d.1346) commentary on his own Tanqīḥ al-Uṣūl, and a commentary on the Ādāb of Birgivî Mehmet Efendi (d.1573). Brief excerpts from these two works thus appear on the leaves still attached to the upper and lower covers."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 635', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.371, copied for himself ("faragha min taʻlīqih kitābatan ... ʻalá yad man ʻallaqahu li-nafsih...") by ʻAlī ibn ʻAbd al-Laṭīf al-Ayyūbī al-ʻAlamī [al-ʻIlmī ?] al-Liddī al-Shāfiʻī al-Qādirī with transcription completed 15 Jumādá II 1002 [ca. 8 March 1594].', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 187a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in layers of leather and paper, upper cover in brown leather with laid paper over top, lower cover marbled paper (in light blue, pink, etc. and possibly also over red-brown leather) with layers of paper over top, spine and fore edge flap now covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in yellow laid paper (doublure hinges trimmed in a scallop pattern) ; upper cover bears stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition) ; sewn in heavy dark yellow thread (even yarn), two stations ; overall in quite poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, upper cover detaching, fore edge flap splitting, etc. ; numerous repairs in brown leather (also damaged) ; ill-fitting, perhaps not original ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 29 mm. apart (horizontal), anchor in circle with leaf above watermark (70 mm. tall, see p.102) and "M [?]" under trefoil countermark (see pp.104-5) ; sturdy, well-sized and burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords and some abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs or inverted commas.', "Script: Naskh ; clear, compact 'Syrian' (Palestinian) hand ; virtually serifless with very slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline, many open counters, descenders mainly more rectilinear, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf), pointing in distinct dots, occasional vocalization.", 'Layout: Written mainly in 23 lines per page ; written area occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry.', 'Collation: 6 IV (48), V-1 (57), V (67), 3 IV(91), V (101), IV (109), 2 V(129), IV (137), 2 V(157), 2 IV(173), V (183), III (189) ; mix of quaternions and quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between pp.175-176).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "فرغ من تعليقه كتابة نهار الاثنين خامس عشر شهر جمادى الثاني سنة اثنين والف احسن الله خاتمها بخير على يد من علقه لنفسه ولمن شاء الله تعالى من بعده الفقير علي بن عبد اللطيف الايوبي العليمي اللدي الشافعي القادري غفر الله زلله وستر الله خلله وغفر له ولوالديه ولجميع المسلمين والحمد لله رب العالمين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم امين"', 'Explicit: "فرض امر الصلاة والسلام على النبي المكرم صلى الله عليه وسلم توسلا الى الله العظيم الاعظم ... وحقيقة وصفة الى الله الواسع المنان اللهم وادخلنا في عبادك الصالحين واختم لنا بخير ولجميع المسلمين امين والحمد لله الذي هدانا لهذا وما كنا لنهتدي لو لا ان هدانا الله اللهم لك الحمد كما ينبغي لجلال وجهك ولعظيم سلطانك اللهم صل وسلم وبارك على سيدنا محمد ... دعواهم فيها سبحانك واللهم وتحيتهم فيها سلام واخر دعواهم ان الحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله هادي من يشاء الى سبيله ومغني من اختاره لمعرفته بنور يقينه عن اقامة برهانه ودليله ... اما بعد فان علم السلوك فرض عين بلا خلاف على الذكور والاناث والعبيد والاشراف ... وكتب السلوك كثيرة لا تكاد تحصر لكن من اجلها وانفعها واجمعها واخصر [اخصرها] كتاب سلك العين لاذهاب الغين تسمية المصطفى عليه الصلاة والسلام تأليف الشيخ العارف الرباني سيدي عبد القادر بن عمر بن حبيب الصفدي من بلاد الشام ..."', 'Title from inscription on upper board lining.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the commentary by ʻAlī ibn ʻAṭīyah ibn Ḥasan, ʻAlwān al-Ḥamawī (d.1530) on the Ṣūfī qaṣīdah in tāʼ by ‘Abd al-Qādir ibn Muḥammad ibn ʻUmar ibn Ḥabīb al-Ṣafadī (d. 1509) entitled Silk al-ʻayn li-idhhāb al-ghayn. Followed by several excerpts (pp.372-375).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 28', 'Origin: A nearly unpointed and freely ligatured statement on fol.6b (p.12) appears to be the colophon for the ʻAqāʼid. The name of the copyist is difficult to make out, but may be Kamāl al-Dīn ibn Mawlānā Ḥusayn al-Dīn, with transcription completed in 843 [1439 or 1440] in Shamkūr (شمكور), i.e. Şămkir [Shamkir, Azerbaijan]. A colophon for Sharḥ al-ʻAqāʼid appears on fol.163b (p.338), copied by Jār Allāh ibn Mawlānā Kamāl al-Dīn also in Shamkūr (شمكور) with date of transcription not provided. Likely also 15th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Several inserted slips carrying text of gloss, etc., nearly all tipped in (paginated pp.27-28, pp.33-34, pp.37-38, pp.45-46, pp.51-52, pp.213-214, pp.295-296).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 113. Al-Akaid, with commentary."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather (sheep) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper (over green cloth on lower cover) ; upper and lower covers bear simple blind-tooled vegetal design along center line, now barely visible ; blind-stamped pendant on envelope flap ; sewn in light brown thread, two stations ; endbands in red and blue, damaged leaving core and primaries exposed ; in poor condition with much abrasion, staining, moisture damage, negative draw in upper cover, detaching of cover exposing spine lining and sewing, delamination of boards, lifting and detaching of leathers, repairs in a variety of leathers and cloth, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper of roughly three types ; first type with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), fairly indistinct with some curving, chain lines visible and spaced roughly 16-18 mm. apart perhaps in groups of at least four ; second type quite dark (brown) with many undissolved fibers visible and rather indistinct laid lines (horizontal) and perhaps chain lines (difficult to measure), well-burnished and quite smooth ; third type with laid lines spaced roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines spaced about 15 mm. apart in groups of at least three, more similar to first type in color and texture.', 'Decoration: Text of Sharḥ al-ʻAqāʼid rubricated with keywords, section headings, overlining, text of matn, etc. in red ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh ; main texts of the ʻAqāʼid and Sharḥ al-ʻAqāʼid chiefly in two Caucasian hands ; both are virtually serifless with mainly closed counters, occasional sweeping descenders (final nun, etc.), free assimilation of some letters such as final hāʼ and preceding rāʼ, etc. and slight effect of words descending to baseline or tilt to the right (more pronounced in the hand of the ʻAqāʼid) ; casually pointed and often freely ligatured.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page [the ʻAqāʼid] and 9-10 lines per page [Sharḥ al-ʻAqāʼid] ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV+1 (9), 19 IV(161), II (165) ; chiefly quaternions ; what remains of final leaf now pasted to interior of lower cover ; catchwords occasionally present, otherwise last word of final line on verso repeated at beginning of top line on recto of following leaf ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and skips two pages between pp.141-142).', 'Colophon: [al-ʻAqāʼid] "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "حرره [؟] الفقير النحيف والحقير الضعيف كمال [؟] الحمري [؟] بن مولانا حسين الحمرى [؟] عفي عنهما الثالث من [...؟] لسنة [؟] ثلث واربعين وثمانمائة في ناحية شمكور ...حميت عن الآفات والبليات" ; [Sharḥ al-ʻAqāʼid] "Scribal," rectangular, reads:"تم الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب على يد اضعف الطلاب جرما واقواهم جرما المحتاج الى رحمة الله جار الله بن مولانا كمال الدين نور الله قبره في ناحية شمكور حميت عن الآفات في الايام والدهور"', 'Explicit: [al-ʻAqāʼid] "ورسل البشر افضل من رسل الملائكة ورسل الملائكة افضل من عامة البشر وعامة البشر افضل من عامة الملائكة والله اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب" [Sharḥ al-ʻAqāʼid] "والكمال فلا دلالة على افضلية الملائكة والله اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب"', 'Incipit: [al-ʻAqāʼid] "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على سيدنا محمد واله اجمعين قال اهل الحق حقائق الاشياء ثابتة والعلم بها متحقق خلافا للسوفسطائية ..." [Sharḥ al-ʻAqāʼid] "الحمد لله المتوحد بجلال ذاته وكمال صفاته المتقدس في نعوت الجبروت عن شوائب النقص وسماته ... وبعد فان مبنى علم الشرائع والاحكام واساس قواعد عقائد الاسلام هو علم التوحيد ... وان المختصر المسمى بالعقائد للامام الهمام قدوة علماء الاسلام نجم الملة والدين عمر النسفي اعلى الله درجته في دار السلام يشتمل هذا الفن غرر الفرائد ودرر الفوائد في ضمن فصول هي للدين قواعد واصول ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '4. fol.164a-165b : [once blank, now carries extratextual material, excerpts, etc.].', '3. fol.10b-fol.163b : [Sharḥ al-ʻAqāʼid] / Saʻd al-Dīn Masʻūd ibn ʻUmar al-Taftāzānī.', '2. fol.7a-fol.10a : [extratextual material, excerpts, etc.].', '1. fol.1b-fol.6b : [al-ʻAqāʼid] / Abū Ḥafṣ ʻUmar Najm al-Dīn al-Māturīdī al-Nasafī.', "Well-glossed copy of al-Taftāzānī's commentary on the popular creed, al-ʻAqāʼid al-Nasafīyah of Abū Ḥafs ʻUmar Najm al-Dīn al-Māturīdī al-Nasafī (d. 537/1142), preceded by the text of the ʻAqāʼid itself."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 251', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.293, second work copied by Aḥmad ibn Akhī Ṭawī [?] (Ahmet b. Akhitovi) with transcription finished in Merzifon, first of Shawwāl 873 [April 1469]. First work likely composed and copied in the early part of the 16th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "363 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf (p.1) ; "73" inscribed in pencil on opening \'title page\' (p.4) ; "٢٢٩" on spine label.', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in light brown leather and edged in brown leather (leather edged framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap, now lost) ; doublures in dark red leather with tooled border (over leather edging in dark red-brown leather) and central gold-painted diamond-shaped piece ; upper and lower covers carry large scalloped stamped (dark red leather onlays) and gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal decoration, compare Déroche class. OAi 9) and pendants, along with tooled border in a seires of tiny s-shaped stamps flanked by fillets over leather edging ; sewn in salmon colored thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in blue and yellow on salmon primaries, good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with flap entirely lost, abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; repairs in dark red-brown leather (rebacked, rehinged, partial edging for delaminating boards).', "Support: non-European laid paper of at least two types ; opening work on type with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal or vertical, quite indistinct) and chain lines rarely visible, medium cream in color, sturdy and well-burnished (burnisher's marks visible) ; second work on type with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines (horizontal) grouped in threes with 10-12 mm. between chains and 41-42 mm. between groups, sturdy and well-burnished, some leaves tinted pink, others yellow ; minor pest damage, staining and tide lines.", 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening of first work on p.4 consisting of rectangular piece (with cartouche likely once carrying basmalah) surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome), the upper portion of which has been lost to trimming ; both pieces are filled with a swirling vegetal pattern on fields of blue and gold ; keywords (in preface and close) chrysographed ; Qurʼānic text and section headings rubricated ; textual divders in the form of gold discs ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of heavy gold bank flanked by black fillets ; fine illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening of second work on p.186, consisting of rectangular panel carrying basmalah in gold in an elongated cartouche surrounded by field of blue, all overlaid with vegetal decoration reminiscent of arabesque and bordered in gold interlace with green and red accents ; text being commented upon chrysographed (apart from third to final and next to final leaf where matn is either rubricated or overlined in red) ; symbols rubricated ; written area surrounded mainly by gold rule-border, with gold and blue rules on incipit and facing page (pp.186-87) and red rule-border instead on third to final leaf (pp.289-90).', 'Script: Naskh ; two fine Turkish hands, with each work in a distinct hand ; opening work in an elegant naskh, partially but inconsistently seriffed (mainly on lām of definite article, but not on free-standing alif), with very slight effect of tilt to the left, pointing in distinct dots with two dots occasionally positioned one above the other, shaqq of kāf elongated, في often written with yāʼ mardūdah ; second work in another elegant naskh, similar to the first hand but more compact, with more closed counters and dots often contracted to lines, partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs appearing on free-standing alif, some letters and words superscript ; hand slightly changes at close of second work ; both works partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 15 and and 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV-1 (7), 10 IV(87), II (91), V-1 (100), V (110), IV (118), V (128), IV (136), IV+2 (146) ; quinions and quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf).', 'Dedication: As appears in preface (pp.6-8), Sharḥ Sūrat al-Anʻām dedicated to Sultan Selim I (r.1512-20).', 'Colophon: [Sharḥ Sūrat al-Anʻām] "Authorial" and "Scribal" [?], reads: "تمت قد استارح من اصول هذا السواد الى البياض رجاء حصول وجوه البياض في الوجوه يوم تبيض وجوه وتسود وجوه خادم العلماء حافظ سلطان محمد ابن مولانا بايزيد التاشكندي صانه الله عن جميع الافات والبليات وصلى الله على محمد وعلى آله وتابعيه آمين" ; [Sharḥ al-ʻAqāʼid al-Nasafīyah] "Scribal," reads: "تمت الكتاب وحسن توفيقه [كذا] على يد الضعيف الفقير الحقير المذنب المحتاج الى رحمة الله تع وغفرانه احمد بن اخى طوى في بلدة مرزيفون من اول شهر شوال تاريخ سنه ثلث وسبعين وثمانمائة اللهم اغفر لمن نظر متن [؟] النسخة ودعاء لكاتبه امين يا رب العالمين تم تم"', 'Explicit: [Sharḥ Sūrat al-Anʻām] "فمن قرأ الانعام صلى عليه واستغفر اولئك السبعون ملك بعدد كل آية من سورة الانعام يوما وليلة والحمد لله على انعام شرح سورة الانعام والشكر له على مزيد الانعام والاتمام والصلوة على نبيه محمد عليه الصلوة والسلام" ; [Sharḥ al-ʻAqāʼid al-Nasafīyah] "والكمال فلا دلالة على افضلية الملائكة"', 'Incipit: [Sharḥ Sūrat al-Anʻām] "الحمد لله الذي خلق السماوات والارض وجعل الظلمات والنور وبعث رسوله بقرآن هو شفاء لما في الصدور صلى الله عليه وعلى آله واصحابه البدور اما بعد فقد سألني جمع من الاكابر والاصاغر ممن لا يسعني مخالفتهم ان افسر آيات سورة الانعام على وجه يتضح به المرام عند الانام فاجبته سائلا متضرعا ان ينفع به كما نفع من سائر التفاسير ..." ; [Sharḥ al-ʻAqāʼid al-Nasafīyah] "الحمد لله المتوحد بجلال ذاته وكمال صفاته المتقدس في نعوت الجبروت عن شوائب النقص وسماته ... وبعد فان مبنى علم الشرائع والاحكام واساس قواعد عقائد الاسلام هو علم التوحيد والصفات الموسوم بالكلام ... وان المختصر المسمى بالعقائد للامام الهمام قدوة علماء الاسلام نجم الملة والدين عمر النسفي اعلى الله درجته في دار السلام يشتمل من هذا الفن غلى غرر الفرائد ودرر الفوائد في ضمن فصول هي للدين قواعد واصول ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.185-p.293 : [Sharḥ al-ʻAqāʼid al-Nasafīyah] / Masʻūd ibn ʻUmar al-Taftāzānī.', '3. p.179-p.184 : [blank].', '2. p.4-p.178 : Sharḥ Sūrat al-Anʻām / Muḥammad ibn Bāyazīd al-Tāshkandī.', '1. p.1-p.3 : [blank].', "Fine copy of al-Taftāzānī's commentary on the popular creed, al-ʻAqāʼid al-Nasafīyah of Abū Ḥafs ʻUmar Najm al-Dīn al-Māturīdī al-Nasafī (d. 537/1142), preceded by a commentary on Sūrat al-Anʻām (6) by Ḥāfiẓ Sulṭān Muḥammad ibn Mawlānā Bāyazīd al-Tāshkandī (Hafız Sultan Mehmet b. Mevlana Beyazit et-Taşkendi)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1054', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper (embossed marks in particular), hand, etc. would suggest mid 19th century, likely late 1850s.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type III binding (without flap), tight back though not fully flush with text block (ill-fitting or deliberate squares) ; board linings and flyleaves in printed pages taken from an illustrated lamp catalog (recycled / reused printed ‘waste’) with entries including printed drawings and descriptions for various types of "Table Lamps," "Glass Reading Lamps," and "Polished Metal 10-line Kosmos Lamps" ; hinges in white textile ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla (scalloped and filled with floral composition), pendants (stamp of lower pendant outline offset on lower cover), border lozenges, and cornerpieces, as well as border of blind rules and annular stamps ; now stab sewn in white thread (stained pink in places), any sewing through the folds virtually impossible to examine ; overall in fairly good condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of leather at spine ; seemingly ill-fitting text block, as squares do not match (a few mm. at fore edge, a few mm. at tail, about a cm too large at head) and perhaps recycled / reused cover originally crafted for a smaller text block.', 'Support: Paper of several types, mainly wove with two different embossed marks and machine laid ; opening gathering (through p.16) mainly in a type of wove paper with oval embossed mark faintly visible in p.10, beige in color, well-burnished (burnishers\' marks visible), though mould pattern of curving laid lines spaced roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and occasional chain line is visible in leaf carrying p.4 ; next two gatherings (pp.17-48) and final two gatherings (pp.161-180) in another wove type, sturdier, thicker and lighter in color with many inclusions and oval embossed mark visible in pp.21, 25, 28, 172, 174, 175 (partially inked) similar to that in opening type but far more distinct with "фабрики Слободской кордяжск" surrounding initials "Н П" (compare no.152 dated 1856 in Klepikov 1959) ; next four gatherings (pp.49-112) in a machine laid paper with roughly 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart, no watermarks visible, soft, grayish in tone ; next three gatherings in another wove type with a different oval embossed mark with "С Ф" (i.e. Сурская фабрика) at the center above "П В СЕР[ГЕЕВА]" (see p.145, 149, etc. and compare no.178 dated 1856-1860 in Klepikov 1959), blue-gray in color (between azure and cerulean) and quite opaque, sturdy though fairly thin and soft ; some staining and tears ; a few repairs in machine laid paper.', 'Decoration: A few keywords rubricated toward opening ; overlining in black and red sets off text being commented upon (al-ʻAqāʼid al-Nasafīyah) ; diagram in margin of p.18.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) ; chiefly a clear Turkish / Turkic hand (perhaps Transoxanian, Crimean, or Eastern Anatolian) ; serifless with very slight effect of words descending to baseline or gently inclining to the left, elongation of some horizontal strokes, many flattened, elongated descenders, kāf mashqūqah preferred with shaqq (curving upward) on even final kāf, final tāʼ marbūṭah often given as tāʼ maftūḥah, point of final nūn typically set above narrow bowl, pointing (two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots ; a few pages fully or partially in a Turkish / Turkic naskh (see opening pp.1-3 and p.146).', 'Layout: Written mainly in 8-10 lines per page (single column), though text of final two leaves (pp.177-179) is far more densely arranged with 20-22 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board more clearly evident in leaves of blue paper).', 'Collation: i, 11 IV(88), I (90), i ; difficult to examine due to tight stab sewing, but appear to be almost exclusively quaternions ; proper catchwords not present though occasionally last word of final line on the verso of a leaf repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; verso of final leaf (p.180) left blank (text ends abruptly on recto, p.179) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "في كتب الشافعية ان القاضي ينعزل بالفسق بخلاف الامام والفرق ان في انعزاله و وجوب نصب غيره اثارة الفتنة لما فيه الشوكة بخلاف القاضي وفي رواية النوادر"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله المتوحد بجلال ذاته وكمال صفاته المتقدس في نعوت الجبروت عن شوائب النقص وسماته ... وبعد فان مبنى علم الشرائع والاحكام واساس قواعد عقائد الاسلام هو علم التوحيد والصفات الموسوم بالكلام ... وان المختصر المسمى بالعقائد للامام قدوة علماء الاسلام نجم الملة والدين عمر النسفي اعلى الله درجته في دار السلام يشتمل من هذا الفن على غرر الفوائد ودرر الفرائد في ضمن فصول هي للدين قواعد واصول ... فحاولت ان اشرحه شرحا يفصل مجملاته ويبين معضلاته ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Well-glossed (though incomplete and ending abruptly) copy of al-Taftāzānī’s (d.1389?) commentary on the popular creed, al-ʻAqāʼid al-Nasafīyah of Abū Ḥafs ʻUmar Najm al-Dīn al-Māturīdī al-Nasafī (d.1142).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 73', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.207, copied by Shaʻbān ibn Ibrāhīm ibn Muṣṭafá. Transcription completed ("tammat hādhihi al-nuskhah al-sharīfah...") in 1082 [1671 or 1672].', 'Accompanying materials: Numerous inserts carrying glosses, etc. and one document, often tipped in (first not paginated between pp.86-87, then paginated pp.139-140, pp.151-152, pp.153-154. pp.203-204).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 139. Commentary on al-Akaid al-adudiyah." ; "٣٧" on tail-edge of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in marbled paper with spine, fore-edge flap, and edges/turn-ins in red-brown leather (marbled paper faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; sewn in black thread, two stations, sewing often broken resulting in many loose quires ; in poor condition with severe abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, minor pest damage, minor spine slant (slightly cocked), etc. ; repairs in cloth and leather.', 'Support: European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart ; watermarks include bird above hill or mount in scrollwork and paschal lamb (compare Heawood 2840) ; occasional staining.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviations rubricated ; some overlining and textual dividers in the form of circles in red.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) ; sans serif ; effect of words descending to baseline ; mainly closed counters ; occasional elongated horizontal strokes and swooping descenders.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: I (2), 5 V(52), I+1 (55), 4 V(95), I+1 (98), II (102), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts, skips two pages each between pp.55-56 and pp.157-158).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "تمت هذه النسخة الشريفة الجليلة الكاملة في الاعتقاديات بعون الملك الوهاب على يد عبد الضعيف شعبان ابن الحاج ابراهيم ابن الحاج مصطفى تاريخه سنة اثنى وثمانين والف من الهجرة النبوية سنة ۱۰۸۲"', 'Explicit: "وهو على خلاف ما عرفه بعض المتأخرين جعل الاسباب موافقة ... وهب لنا من لدنك رحمة انك انت الوهاب واغفر لنا انك انت الكريم التواب"', 'Incipit: "يا من وفقنا لتحقيق العقائد الاسلامية وعصمنا عن التقليد في الاصول والفروع الكلامية ... وبعد فيقول العبد الفقير الى عفو ربه الغني محمد بن اسعد الصديقي الدواني ان العقائد العضدية لم تدع قاعدة في اصول العقائد الدينية الا دانت عليها ... فحداني ذلك الى اني اشرحها شرحا وافيا بحل المغالق ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of the commentary on al-ʻAqāʼid by ʻAḍud al-Dīn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Aḥmad al-Ījī (d. 756/1355).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 509', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.119, copied by ʻAbd Allāh ibn Kuzal [?] with transcription completed in 849 [1445 or 6]. As appears on p.121, transcription of grammatical work excerpt completed 22 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 863 [ca. 20 October 1459].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. (pp.1-2) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. (pp.3-4). -- c. Slip carrying glosses (pp.23-24).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 207" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark red textured paper (resembling a pebble grain) with red leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in red-tinted wove paper ; resewn in light blue thread, four stations, perhaps originally in red thread ; overall in poor condition with abrasion, lifting of paper and leather, minor spine slant (slightly cocked), etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines grouped in threes (horizontal) with 8-10 mm. between chains and 29-39 mm. between groups (see pp.32, 64, 102, etc.) ; well-burnished, sturdy and fairly smooth ; staining and tidelines.', 'Decoration: Some keywords, abbreviation symbols, excerpts of text being commented upon, corrections and glosses rubricated ; others in blue ink ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', "Script: Naskh ; clear 'Syrian' or Egyptian hand in a medium line ; serifless, fluid and rounded with curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in distinct dots, kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred, the lām alif al-warrāqīyah preferred ; main hand with slight effect of tilt to the right, occasionally more exaggerated ; second quire (pp.25-44) supplied in a somewhat stiffer hand with very slight effect of tilt to the left, tails of many descenders (lām, nūn, sīn, ṣāḍ, etc.) quite flat and shortened (not continuing up to complete bowl) ; from p.111 to close, aspect changes to be slightly more compact with marked inclination to the right, descenders of rāʼ and mīm fairly straight, short and stiff, hāʼ looking like two inverted commas ; partially vocalized ; final work supplied in still a different hand.", 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V-1 (9), 4 V(49), V-1 (58), i ; Chiefly quinions ; quire numbering in the form of whole words in the upper counter corner of the recto of the first leaf of each quire (first apparent in the third) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "تم اكمال هذا الشرح المبارك على يد الفقير المعترف بالتقصير عبد الله بن كزل عام ۸۴۹ حامدا لله ومصليا على نبيه"', 'Explicit: "فالترقي والعلو انما هو في امر التجرد واظهار الآثار القوية لا في مطلق الشرف والكمال فلا دلالة على افضلية الملائكة والله تعالى اعلم بالصواب والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله المتوحد بجلال ذاته وكمال صفاته المتقدس في نعوت الجبروت عن شوائب النقص وسماته ... وبعد فان مبنى علم الشرائع والاحكام واساس قواعد عقائد الاسلام هو علم التوحيد والصفات الموسوم بالكلام ... وان المختصر المسمى بالعقائد للامام الهمام قدوة علماء الاسلام نجم الملة والدين عمر النسفي اعلى الله درجته في دار السلام يشتمل من هذا الفن على غرر الفوائد ودرر الفرائد في ضمن فصول هي للدين قواعد واصول ... فحاولت ان اشرحه شرحا يفصل مجملاته ويبين معضلاته ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.5).", 'Ms. codex.', '2. p.120-121 : [leaves likely originally left blank, now carry an excerpt from Tuḥfah fī al-naḥw?] / Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd Allāh al-Anṣārī [?].', '1. p.5-p.119 : Sharḥ al-ʻAqāʼid fī ʻilm al-kalām / Masʻūd ibn ʻUmar al-Taftāzānī.', 'Well-glossed copy of al-Taftāzānī’s commentary on the popular creed, al-ʻAqāʼid al-Nasafīyah of Abū Ḥafs ʻUmar Najm al-Dīn al-Māturīdī al-Nasafī (d.1142). On the final two leaves of the codex, an excerpt from a grammatical work (Tuḥfah fī al-naḥw?) attributed to Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd Allāh al-Anṣārī has been added later in a different hand.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 847', 'Origin: As appears at close on p.143, transcription possibly completed in 1205 [1790 or 91] ; decoration, paper, etc. also suggest late 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "۲۰۸" in black ink on front flyleaf (p.1).', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in golden yellow paper ; upper and lower covers carry gold-painted floral cornerpieces and gold-tooled border in a series of striated s-shaped stamps ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in dark blue and yellow, good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with only minor abrasion.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly distinct) and occasional single chain lines visible, gray / off-white in tone, thin and transluscent though sturdy, quite glossy.', 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.4 consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral designs in gold, red, orange, yellow, and light blue on a blue ground, surmounted by vertically elongated scalloped w-shaped piece filled with swirling floral vegetal design in gold, pink, light blue, green, orange, etc. on fields of gold and blue, all set in an elaborate well of heavy gold interlace and red bands with white scroll accents, defined by white and gold bands ; incipit and facing page (pp.4-5) carry splendid illuminated marginal decoration consisting of swirling floral vegetal designs with blossoms and saz leaves in gold with black outline and accents in shades of pink, orange, blue, and white ; written area of incipit and facing page accented by gold cloud-bands and vegetal decoration setting off the two columns within ; written area (as well as divisions within and margins) throughout surrounded by gold frame defined by black fillets.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, mainly closed counters, somewhat casually pointed, occasionally more freely ligatured as in shikastah.', 'Layout: Written in 12 lines per page, with written area divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV+1 (9), 4 IV(41), V (51), IV (59), IV+1 (68), IV (76) ; chiefly quaternions ; final four leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (includes flyleaves).', 'Incipit: "ز نور قبه زرين آينه تمثال زمين تفته فرو پوشد آتشين سربال ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Exquisite copy of a portion of the Dīvān of Ḥakīm Azraqī Haravī, Zayn al-Dīn Abū Bakr (d. before 1073).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 137', 'Origin: As appears in colophons on p.135, p.270, and p.457, copied by Ismāʻīl ibn ʻUmar Abīʻzādah (İsmail Ömer Abizade) in Erzurum. Transcription finished in Dhū al-Qaʹdah and Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1109 [May-July 1698].', 'Accompanying materials: Slips carrying notes inserted (paginated pp.75-76, pp.197-198, pp.379-380).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 92. Sharh al-awamil."', 'Binding: Pasteboards once covered in marbled paper (in yellow, light green, and pink ; see envelope flap) with dark red leather over spine, fore-edge flap, and edges/turn-ins ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations ; worked endbands in red and cream, tailband in good condition, tailband damaged with core exposed ; overall in poor condition with flap entirely lost, significant abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather (especially foreedge flap), delamination of boards, staining, moisture damage, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 27 mm. apart (horizontal) ; sturdy and well-burnished ; watermark difficult to examine but appears to include a line of wreath or scrollwork ; two quires in a different European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), and double-headed eagle watermark ; dark cream and crisp but sturdy.', 'Decoration: Keywords rubricated ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear and compact Turkish hand ; virtually serifless though occasional stray head-serif appears on lām or alif of lām alif ligature ; slight effect of tilt to the left ; many closed counters ; mainly tapered descenders ; kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred ; alif maqṣūrah and final yāʼ often mardūdah ; freely ligatured with final hāʼ often joined preceding rāʼ, dāl, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 6 V(60), III (66), I (68), 6 V(128), II+1 (133), I (135), V (145), VIII (161), 6 V(221), I (223), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and inserts, skips two pages between pp.441-442).', 'Colophon: [1] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب على يد اضعف العباد واحقر الطلاب اسماعيل بن عمر الملقب بابى زاده غفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه في شهر ذي القعدة في يوم السبت في سنة تسع ومائة والف من هجرة من له العز والشرف تمت تم تم تم في وقت قبيل العصر في بلدة ارزن الروم ... في محل دار اغا جى تمت; [2] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب على يد اضعف العباد واحقر الطلاب اسماعيل بن عمر الملقب بابى زاده غفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه في يوم الثلثاء في شهر ذي القعدة في سنة تسع ومائة والف من هجرة من له العز والشرف تم تم تم" ; [3] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب على يد اضعف العباد و احقر الطلاب اسماعيل بن عمر الملقب بابي زاده غفر الله له ولوالديها واحسن اليهما واليه في وقت الظهر في يوم الاحد في شهر ذي الحجة في سنة تسع ومائة والف من هجرة من له العز والشرف في بلدة ارزن الروم ... في محلة دار اغاجى اللهم احفظنا من شرور انفسنا يا رب العالمين برحمتك يا ارحم الراحمين تمت تم تم تم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لمن وجب علينا ثناؤه ... وبعد فاني لما رأيت الطالبين يطلبون شرحا للعوامل الشيخ الامام عبد القاهر يجل اعرابها اردت ان ابين اعرابها بقدر طاقتي ... وسميته بالدرنوج [؟] وما توفيقي الا بالله ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '5. p.278-p.457 : "... اما بعد فهذه كلمات مفهومات فهمنا من كلام الشراح لمتون النحو ... ".', '4. p.271-p.277 : [blank].', '3. p.142-p.270 : "با حرف جر اسم لفظا مجرور مجرود يدر بانك مضاف اولمش ...".', '2. p.136-p.141 : [blank].', '1. p.4-p.135 : "الحمد لمن وجب علينا ثناؤه ... وبعد فاني لما رأيت الطالبين يطلبون شرحا للعوامل ... اردت ان ابين اعرابها ... وسميتها بالدرنوج [؟]".', "Clear copy of a collection of three anonymous commentaries on ʻAbd al-Qāhir ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Jurjānī's (d.1078?) al-ʻAwāmil al-miʼah, on Arabic syntax, with the first commentary providing iʻrāb and the second in Turkish. Text of the matn is included with each."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 141', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests early 17th century.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 161. Work on grammar."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in block-printed paper with spine in dark brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in European laid paper (crossbow watermark) ; sewn in heavy cream thread, two stations ; overall in very poor condition with extremely severe delamination of boards, much abrasion, significant lifting and losses of paper and leather, staining, etc. ; cover almost completely detached at spine ; housed in envelope.', 'Support: European laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal) ; watermarks include crown surmounted by star and crescent and three crescents with GV under trefoil countermark ; sturdy, thick and burnished.', 'Decoration: Basmalah at opening and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; overlining in red ; use of green ink for some abbreviation symbols and accents on keywords.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand ; right-sloping head-serifs appear on ascenders (alif, lām, ṭāʼ, ẓāʼ) but somewhat inconsistently ; effect of slight tilt to the left ; many open counters ; rightward descenders are mainly tapered, others are quite rounded.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 4 V(40), III (46) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "فالعامل في المبتدأ او الخبر هو الابتداء وهو معنى فهذه مائة عامل فلا يستغني الصغير والكبير والرفيع والوضيع والشريف من العرب والعجم عن معرفة هذه الرسالة من العلوم العربية التي فصمت فراعاتها [؟] اللسان عن الغلط واللحن في المتكلم والتعليم بين المعلم والمتعلم على طريق الصواب تمت المعرب الطورنوح بعون الله وحسن توفيقه والحمد لله وحده وصلى الله تعالى ...[كذا]"', 'Incipit: "رضي فعل ماضي معلوم من باب علم الله مرفوع لفظا لانه فاعله تعالى فعل ماضي معلوم من التفاعل فاعله مستتر فيه وهو راجع الى الله عز وجل وتعالى مع ما عمل فيه ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of an anonymous commentary providing iʻrāb for ʻAbd al-Qāhir ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Jurjānī's (d.1078?) al-ʻAwāmil al-miʼah, on Arabic syntax."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 497', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.328, copied by Ḥasan, called Badr, ibn ʻAlī ibn Aḥmad al-Ujhūrī [al-Ajhūrī] with transcription completed 1 Dhū al-Qaʻdah 865 [ca. 8 August 1461].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 180b" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', "Binding: Pasteboards covered in black cloth ; Type III binding (without flap) approaching Western style (obviously not original to the codex, which bears traces of a previous binding with envelope flap) ; contemporary pastedowns and flyleaves in red wove paper, earlier flyleaves in European laid paper (front flyleaf now inverted) ; upper and lower covers carry 'gold'-stamped lozenge-shaped binding ornament ; edges of textblock speckled red ; resewn in cream thread, six stations ; overall in fairly good condition with some staining and deformation to boards, detaching at spine.", 'Support: non-European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines grouped in threes with 7-12 mm. between chains and 50-57 between groups (vertical, not straight) ; sturdy, well-sized and burnished ; earlier flyleaves in European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm., 23 mm. between chain lines and anchor in circle watermark with leaf above and "3" below (67 mm. tall, compare Nikolaev, Watermarks of the Ottoman Empire v.1, no.121).', 'Decoration: Abbreviation symbols (mainly sigla and two-teeth stroke) rubricated ; horizontal strokes of some words accented with red ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas.', "Script: Naskh, characteristically Mamūk ; small, elegant Egyptian or 'Syrian' hand in a medium line ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, some elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in distinct dots (three dots represented by a curved stroke), alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ, foot of isolated lām seated flatly on the baseline with foot of final joined lām descending below the baseline (still quite flat).", 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: ii, 1 (1), V-1 (10), 15 V(160), I (162), ii ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present (though often cut off) ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "ووافق الفراغ من نسخ هذه النسخة المباركة على يد كاتبها حسن المدعو بدر بن علي بن احمد الاجهوري الشافعي في يوم السبت المبارك مستهل ذي القعدة الحرام سنة خمس وستين وثماني مائة احسن الله عاقبتها بمحمد واله وغفر لكاتبها ومالكها ولمن نظر فيها ولمن يقرأ فيها ولكافة المسلمين والمسلمات وصلى الله على اشرف الخلق سيدنا محمد خاتم النبيين والمرسلين وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين"', 'Explicit: [including authorial colophon and ijāzah] "اي وكملت هذه الارجوزة بطيبة مدينة سيدنا رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم قال المؤلف رحمه الله وكان الفراغ منها يوم الخميس ثالث جمادى الاخرة سنة ثماني وستين وسبعمائة ... وكمل هذا الشرح عليها في يوم السبت التاسع والعشرين في رمضان المعظم قدره سنة احدى وسبعين وسبعمائة بالخانقاة الطتمرية خارج القاهرة المحروسة واجزت لكل من سمع مني هذه الارجوزة المذكورة او بعضها ان يروي عني جميع هذا الشرح عليها وجميع ما يجوز ... وعني روايته قاله وكتبه مؤلفه عبد الرحيم بن الحسين بن عبد الرحيم ابن العراقي في التاريخ المذكور تم وكمل والحمد لله اولا واخرا وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم وحسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي قبل بصحيح النية حسن العمل ... وبعد فعلم الحديث خطير وقعه كثير نفعه عليه مدار اكثر الاحكام ... فلهذا ندب الي تقديم الكناية بكتاب في علمه وكنت نظمت فيه ارجوزة الفتها ولبيان اصطلاحهم الفتها وشرعت في شرح لها بسطته ولوضحته ثم رأيته كبير الحجم فاستطلته ومللته ثم شرعت في شرح لها متوسط غير مفرط ... يقول راجي ربه المقتدر عبد الرحيم بن الحسين الاثري ... فهذه المقاصد المهمة توضح من علم الحديث رسمه ...."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.7).", 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of the author's own commentary upon his Alfīyah, or Tabṣirat al-mubtadiʼ wa-tadhkirat al-muntahī or al-Maqāṣid al-muhmalah (see opening matter on p.8), itself a versification of Kitāb Maʻrifat anwāʻ ʻilm (‘ulūm) al-ḥadīth or ʻUlūm al-ḥadīth of ‘Uthmān Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ al-Shahrazūrī (d.1243). Contents listing at opening (pp.5-6)."])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Anchor in circle. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), nos. 1-8.', 'Contains geometrical diagrams.', 'Text rubricated; marginal commentary and corrections in hand of copyist.', "End date from owner's mark on p. [1].", "For al-Samarqandī's Ashkāl al-taʾsīs, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 726; for a later copy of this sharḥ, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 728.", '"A commentary on the Ashkāl al-taʾsīs, a compendium of geometry according to Euclid by Muḥammad ibn Ashraf al-Samarḳandī." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Grapes with crown.', 'Contains geometrical diagrams.', 'Text rubricated and overlined in red; marginal commentary and finding aids in hand of copyist.', 'Date in colophon: wa-tārīkh tarqīmihi sanat 1143 fī Ramaḍān fī yawm 20 [29 March 1731].', "For al-Samarqandī's Ashkāl al-taʾsīs, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 726; for an earlier copy of this sharḥ, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 727.", '"A commentary on the Ashkāl al-taʾsīs, a compendium of geometry according to Euclid by Muḥammad ibn Ashraf al-Samarḳandī." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 535', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest 16th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.1-2) -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and label on lower cover "IL 178" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in shell marbled paper (mainly in pink and blue, which Jake Benson has identified as being of 19th century Spanish manufacture) with red leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted wove paper ; sewn in white thread, two stations ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of paper, almost fully detached at spine, etc.', "Support: European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 32-34 mm. apart (horizontal), and bull's head watermark (without motif above, see p.10, 94, 95, etc.) ; sturdy and well-burnished to glossy ; some staining and tide lines.", 'Decoration: Keywords and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas.', "Script: Naskh ; small, compact Turkish or 'Syrian' hand with Persianate features ; fairly vertical and virtually serifless with mainly curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, point of final nūn set deep within bowl, kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred, occasional hāʼ looking like two inverted commas one above the other, and some free assimilation of letters.", 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 6 V(60) ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Explicit: "قال رسول الله عليه الدين النصيحة قالوا لمن يا رسول الله قال لله ولرسوله ولائمة المسلمين وعامتهم وارجو انا [؟] ان يكون هذا المختصر [؟] ... وان اكون من الناصحين للمسلمين مقيمي الدين واسأل الله ان يجعلني من المنتفعين ... واجعلني من الذين لا خوف عليهم ولا هم يحزنون وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين والحمد لله اولا واخرا وهو رب العالمين تم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي تفرد في ذاته بالعلو والغني وتسمى في الازل باسمائه الحسنى ... وبعد يقول العبد المعتصم بحبل الله المتين والمتمسك بالعروة الوثقى حب الله ورسله ثم حب الفقراء والمساكين اضعف العباد محمد بن بهاء الدين ... اعلم ان نبينا صلوات الله عليه انما ختمت به النبوة الشريفة لجمعية استعداد وكلية فوائد لانه مظهر الاسم الاعظم الجامع لجميع الاسماء ..."', "Title from inscriptions on 'title page' (p.5).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of a treatise on the most beautiful names of God (al-asmāʼ al-ḥusná) by Muḥyī al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Bahāʼ al-Dīn, al-shahīr bi-Bahāʼ al-Dīn Zādah.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 932', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.36, transcription of opening selections completed 8 Jumada I 1359, corresponding to 14 June 1940 and 7 Baʼūnah 1656. Likely copied in Egypt and eventually bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 81', 'Binding: Boards covered in black textured cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pale pink and green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "قانون الاشراقيين" ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; compact hand in a thin to medium line (line thickness changes) ; serifless and freely ligatured with slight effect of tilt to the right, mainly closed counters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 26-28 lines per page.', 'Collation: Two pages between sections of opening selections left blank (see pp.12-13) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: [Sharḥ Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam] "Scribal," reads "تم نسخه في الثامن من جمادى الاولى احد شهور سنة ١٣٥٩ الموافق للرابع عشر من يونيو ١٩٤٠ وللسابع من بؤنه ١٦٥٦"', 'Explicit: [Sharḥ Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam] "ثم قبلت بعد ذلك صور بعد صور فان لا يمكن لاحد ان يرى الهيولي لانها تدلست [؟] صور كثيرة فهي خفية تحتها لا ينالها شيء من ... البتة الى هنا وقف قلم الكتاب وكان خاتمة هذا الكتاب المستطاب والله اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب" ; [Mujlī] "وانت اذا حققت ذلك عرفت ما فيه من ... الكثرة والغراء [؟] الصور"', 'Incipit: [Sharḥ Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam] "اعلم ان الشأن الآلهي والامر التدبيري دوري فان الحضرة الاحدية اذا اقتضت التعين الاول والعين الواحدة المسماة في لسان اهل الذوق بالبرزخ الجامع الجامع [كذا] بين احكام الوجوب والامكان المحيط بالطرفين ..." ; [Mujlī] "يا ذا المن الجسيم والطول العظيم والشأن القويم والامر الحكيم ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '2. p.37-p.204 : Hādhā huwa al-Kitāb al-mustaṭāb al-maʻrūf bi-al-Mujallī al-mawsūm bi-Maslak al-afhām wa-al-Nūr al-munjī min al-ẓalām / Muḥammad ibn ʻAlī Ibn Abī Jumhūr al-Aḥsāʼī.', '1. p.1-p.36 : [selections from Sharḥ Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam opening with al-Qānūn al-thālith fī Bayān al-shaʼn al-ilāhī] / ʻAbd al-Razzāq al-Qāshānī.', "Careful copy of selections from the commentary by ʻAbd al-Razzāq al-Qāshānī (d.1330?) on Ibn ʻArabī's Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam followed by Ibn Abī Jumhūr's (d. after 1499) Kitāb al-Mujlī or Mujlī mirʼāt al-Nūr al-munjī, a supercommentary upon his own kalām work, Maslak al-afhām fī ʻilm al-kalām and its commentary, al-Nūr al-munjī min al-ẓalām (seemingly incomplete transcript with commentary, likely that of the copyist)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 513', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.427, transcription completed 5 Muḥarram 917 [ca. 4 April 1511].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 211" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dull yellow laid paper with tan leather over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins (framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-tooled design evoking central mandorla, pendants and cornerpieces built up of a repeated star or floral-shaped stamp ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in dark blue and cream, in protected by extended spine leather, in good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, pest damage, lifting and losses of paper and leather, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines grouped in threes with 11-12 mm. between chains and 42-45 mm. between groups (vertical, see p.20, etc.) ; sturdy and thick, medium cream in color, well-burnished to glossy ; some staining.', 'Decoration: Keywords, numerals and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; overlining in red.', "Script: Naskh ; clear, compact Turkish or 'Syrian' hand ; partially but irregularly seriffed with left-sloping head-serif on joined alif and right-sloping head-serif on free-standing alif, effect of tilt to the left, slight effect of words descending to baseline, quite rounded with curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, somewhat freely ligatured, kāf mashqūqah preferred, point of final nūn assimilated with bowl.", 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page.', 'Collation: 6 V(60), IV (68), 14 V(208), IV-2 (214) ; chiefly quinions ; pages between introduction and rest of text left blank (pp.44045) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "فرغ من تحريره في يوم الاحد خامس شهر المحرم سنة سبع عشر وتسعمائة"', 'Explicit: "ويهدي المتوجهين اليه والطالبين وهو الموفق الى الرشاد ومنه المبداء واليه المعاد وهذا اخر ما اردنا بيانه والحمد لله على التوفيق والشكر لولي الحقائق والتحقيق"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي عين الاعيان بفيضه الاقدس الاقدم وقدرها بعلمه في غيب ذاته ... وبعد يقول العبد الضعيف دآود بن محمود بن محمد القصيري ... لما وفقني الله تع وكشف عليه اسراره ... وكان جماعة من الاخوان المشتغلين بتحصيل الكمال الطالبين لاسرار ذي الجمال والجلال شعروا في قرأة كتاب فصوص الحكم ... وكان الحق قد اطلعني على معانيه المتساطعة ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the commentary by Dāwūd ibn Maḥmūd ibn Muḥammad al-Qayṣarī upon Ibn ʻArabī's (d.1240) Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam, a collection of aphorisms summarizing the teaching of 28 prophets from Adam to Muḥammad. Opens with introduction sometimes found on its own and treated as a separate work under the title Maṭlaʻ khuṣūṣ al-kilam fī maʻānī Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam (see pp.2-43)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 647', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.460, copied in Istanbul by Aḥmad ibn Farhād (Ahmet bin Ferhat [ Ferhâd ]) with transcription completed mid-Jumādá II 983 [September 1575]. As appears in preceding authorial colophon, composition completed in Amasya end of Rabīʻ II 957 [March-April 1552].', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 214" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather with spine in brown leather ; Type III binding (or possibly Type II with flap now lost) ; doublures in dark red leather, now partially covered by untinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry gold-stamped (with recessed onlays) mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OAi 9) and pendants, along with tooled border ; sewn in black and cream thread, two stations, many threads broken or gone ; overall in quite poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of leather (onlays in particular) and board, delamination of boards, detaching at spine ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of at least two types ; one type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks including font with lid and cross [leaf] (or cardinal’s mitre / chapeau) (see p.30, 33, 130, 131, 458, 464, etc. and compare Chapeau nos. 3447, etc. in Briquet, Les Filigranes, Chapeau nos.2-8 in Velkov, Les Filigranes dans les documents Ottomans and nos. 31-32 in Nikolaev, Watermarks of the Ottoman Empire, vol. 1) and angel / figure in circle with star above (see p.460, 461, etc.), thin though sturdy, well-burnished to glossy ; another type with 11-12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27-29 mm. apart (horizontal), angel / figure watermark (see p.366, 367, etc.) and "H S" under trefoil countermark (see p.288 and compare Briquet 621 and 654, Udine 1573 and 1576), lighter in color, sturdier ; some staining and foxing.', 'Decoration: Keywords, certain excerpts (ḥadīth, etc.) and abbreviation symbols (stroke above notable words, etc.) rubricated ; overlining in red ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Turkish hand ; serifless with mainly closed counters, effect of tilt to the right, only slight effect of words descending to baseline, exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V (10), V+1 (21), 21 V(231), III-1 (236) ; chiefly quinions ; initially lacks proper catchwords but last word of final line on the verso of each leaf is usually repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; from p.180, catchwords isolated in the lower margin of the verso present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly skips two pages each between pp.31-32, 167-168, 311-312, 431-432).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," rectangular, reads "تم شرح كلستان في اخر ربيع الاخر سنة سبع وخمسين وتسعمائة في بلدة اماسية حميت عن البلية" ; "Scribal," triangular, reads "وقد وقع الفراغ من كتابته اواسط جمادى الاخرى سنة ثلث وثمان وتسعمائة في بلدة اسلامبول كتبه الفقير احمد ابن فرهاد غفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه تم بعون الله"', 'Explicit:"من بعد ذلك الطلب غفرانا لصاحبه اعلم ايها الناظر في شرحي هذا ان الشارح الاول قد بذل جهده في شرحه وان اخطأ في مواضع كثيرة وقد نبهت على مواضع الخطأ واوردت الصواب وبالغت في رده باللطائف لان كلستان موضع الفرح غفر الله تع له ولي ولسائر المسلمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعلني من علماء البيان والمعاني ... وبعد فان العبد المتوسل الى رحمة الملك القدير بعذر تقصيره في شكر نعمه سرورى الفقير كان منقطعا عن الناس ومعرضا عن الاستئناس ثم دعاه الى الخدمة بالامر السلطاني والقائد الوارد بالكتاب الحاقاني افضل آل عثمان صاحب العلم والعرفان السلطان ابن السلطان السلطان مصطفى بن السلطان سليمان ... ولما كان كتاب كلستان مشتملا على حكايات غريبة وغطات عجيبة ... بحيث يحتاج اكثر مواضعه الى الشرح والبيان ... شرحته شرحا كافيا ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the Arabic commentary upon the Gulistān of Sa‘dī, composed by Muṣliḥ al-Dīn Muṣṭafá Surūrī (Sürûrî) for prince Mustafa (d.1553) son of Sultan Süleyman I (r.1520-66).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 996', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974). Some sections perhaps copied earlier.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 145', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "شرح هياكل النور الاصفهانى | J.H.D." ; sewn in white thread over two recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Machine wove paper of at least a few types, as well as machine laid paper with watermark of "GOUVERNEMENT EGYPTIEN" with star and crescent at center and other smaller crescents with three stars (see pp.117-122, 131-136, etc. and compare Walz, "The Paper trade of Egypt and the Sudan," p.91), and wove ledger / grid paper (see pp.123-130).', 'Decoration: Headings and keywords (often text being commented upon) rubricated ; otherwise text executed mainly in blue or black ink.', 'Script: Naskh with influence of ruqʻah ; modern hand in a medium to bold line ; mainly serifless with effect of tilt to the left, very slight effect of words descending to baseline, free assimilation of letters, curvilinear descenders, open and closed counters, pointing in strokes or conjoined dots (occasionally oriented vertically), final yāʼ usually unpointed ; some sections in ruqʻah.', 'Layout: Written in 13-16 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 7 IV(56), I (58), 2 V(78), VI (90), V (100), 2 IV(116), 4 (120), 2 V(140), i ; chiefly quaternions ; pagination in blue or black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, each section numbered distinctly ; pages between some sections left fully or partially blank (see pp.43-49, 115-117, 200-201) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (pagination skips from 219 to 300, so is thereafter off by 80 pages).', 'Explicit: "جمع بطريق عموم المجاز اذ لا مؤثر في الحقيقة الا هو كما مر والله اعلم تمت انوار الهيكل الخامس من هياكل النور السهروردية بشرح الجلال الدواني الصديقي نورنا الله بانوار العلم والعرفان وتوجنا بتاج البهجة والبهاء والايقان انه سميع مجيب الدعوات مفيض الخير والبركات بل هو غاية الغايات ونهاية النهايات وتمام التمامات"', 'Incipit: "يا من نصب رايات آيات قدرته على كواهل هياكل الممكنات واودع اسرار حكمته في قوابل شواكل الكائنات ... اما بعد فهذا ايها الذكي المتوقد شرح لهياكل النور يحاكي بحسن دقائقه شواكل الحور ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy of the commentary by Jalāl al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Asʻad al-Dawānī (d.1502 or 3) on Shihāb al-Dīn Yaḥyá ibn Ḥabash al-Suhrawardī's (d.1191) Hayākil al-nūr, with opening and then separate sections for the fourth, fifth , and sixth hayākil."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 363', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; decoration, hand, etc. suggest 16th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Slip of wove paper with note in hand of G. Meredith-Owens "363 | Dīvān of Bāḳī | undated, probably 16th cent. | contemporary binding."', 'Former shelfmark: "93 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; doublures in dark red-brown leather with large mandorla, pendants and cornerpieces in gold and black painted leather filigree appliqué over blue paper (design continues on interior of envelope flap) ; flyleaves (made endpapers) in slate blue paper, gold-flecked ; upper and lower covers block-stamped, black- and and gold-painted (large panel stamp repeated twice with central seam visible) with design of mandorla, pendants, cornerpieces, upper and lower rectangular piece and wide border overlaid with vegetal composition filling panel ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn in light blue (approaching silver) thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, fairly good condition ; overall in good condition with some abrasion, etc. ; likely repairs (edging, fore edge flap, etc.) in dark red / maroon leather.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with roughly 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical, indistinct) and no chain lines plainly visible, cloudy formation, some bits of fibre and inclusions visible, thin and crisp though sturdy, well-burnished, dark cream to beige in color ; opening section heavily moisture damaged with stains, traces of mold, etc. ; elsewhere breakthrough at frames.', 'Decoration: Splendid illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece (bordered in bands of gold flanking orange-red band with black crosses) with empty gold cartouche surrounded by swirling vegetal decoration in gold with floral accents in red, yellow, green, light blue, and white on grounds of dark blue (approaching lapis) and gold, surmounted by band of gold with floral motifs (flanked by narrow bands of turquoise and gold) and scalloped dome with similar swirling vegetal motifs with floral accents (in light blue, red, white, orange, green, lavender, etc.) on grounds of gold and dark blue, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) and delicate floral vegetal decoration ; similar elegant headpiece at opening of ghazals on p.62 (rectangular piece with empty cartouche srmounted by wide scalloped dome almost filling the well, chiefly in gold and dark blue approaching lapis with swirling floral vegetal decoration in gold, white, red, lavender, light blue, green, etc.) ; written area throughout surrounded by frame consisting of gold band outlined in black with inner orange fillet and outer blue fillet, divisions within defined by narrow gold bands outlined in black ; from p.257, rubricated section headings provided.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Ottoman hand in a medium line ; characteristically serifless with gentle effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots, point of final nūn set at mouth (occasionally just above) wide, deep bowl ; text from p.257 to close possibly in a different hand.', 'Layout: Written in 12 lines per page with written area divided to two columns ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board visible).', 'Collation: i, IV+1 (9), III+1 (16), 15 IV(136), II-1 (139), i ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "صی دآن شاهد مطبوع شمایل باشی تمت م م م"', 'Incipit: "خط مشك فامكله اى غنچه تر شكر در اولبلر ممسك مكرر ..." ; [ghazals] "ازلدن شاه عشقك بنده فرمانيوز جانا محبت ملكنك سلطان عاليشانيوز جانا ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the collected poems of the celebrated Turkish poet, Baki Efendi (d.1600), opening with kaside in praise of Sultan Süleyman (opening on p.12 in Bâḳî dîvânı : tenkitli basım, Sabahattin Küçük, ed. Ankara: Türk Dil Kurumu, 1994) and closing with Persian verses (compare p.462 in Küçük edition). Contributions to the cataloguing from Elizabeth Kunze.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 72', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on [p.207], transcription finished "wa-qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min taḥrīr hādhihi al-nuskhah..." in the latter part of Rabīʻ I 894 [February-March 1489].', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No.17. Commentary of Harawi on Hidayat al-Hikmah." ; "٤٤٧" on tail edge of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in laid paper and dark brown leather (edges and turn ins), repairs in purple cloth to spine and foreedge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; upper and lower covers bear outline of scalloped mandorla and pendants (cut out) with similar design on envelope flap ; board linings and interior of envelope flap in laid paper ; endbands lost, only traces of primaries remain ; sewing in dark blue thread, two sewing stations ; leather of spine detaching exposing cloth spine lining ; in fair condition.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with chain lines running horizontally in some arrangement of groups of three (possibly with groups of two and or four) having 10-11 mm. between the chain lines and roughly 38-40 mm. between the groups, laid lines running vertically spaced roughly 10 laid lines per cm. ; sized and burnished with some inclusions and undissolved fibers ; some pest damage, moisture damage, and page repairs ; a few leaves of another laid paper with chain lines running horizontally spaced 28-38 mm. apart and 13-14 laid lines per cm.', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with key words such as "قال" and "اقول", overlinings, etc. in red ; inner and outer rule-borders in red ; marginalia written in decorative shapes and patterns ; numerous figures and diagrams in margins elucidating the text (see p.22, p.23, p.25, p.118 and p.120).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; perhaps Turkish / Anatolian hand in a medium line ; virtually serifless with slight effect of words slanting to baseline and occasional superscript at end of line, elongation and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, point of final / free-standing nūn often nearly assimilated with bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V (10), V-1 (19), 7 V (89), IV (97), III (103) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during digitization, begins with front flyleaf).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," rectangular, reads: "وليكن هذا اخر ما قصدنا جمعه في هذا الشرح من الفوائد واردنا نظمه في هذا السلك الفرائد حامدين لله تعالى على التوفيق..." ; "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "وقد وقع الفراغ من تحرير هذه النسخة بعون الله وحسن توفيقه في نوم جهارشنبة في وقت الضحى الكبرى تحريرا [؟] في اخر ربيع الاول سنة اربع وتسعين وثمانمئة"', 'Explicit: "هذا الالم لا يكون لازما بل يكون زائدا لما ذكرنا في الحالة الاولى"', 'Incipit: "باسمك اللهم يا [...؟] الحمد والثناء يا ذا العظمة والكبرياء ويا منشئ الأجسام المختلفة الطباع ... وبعد فهذه مجلة مشتملة على شرح ما سوى المنطق من المختصر الموسوم بالهداية للامام المحقق ... الابهري ... امليته مع قلة البضاعة ..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', "Much annotated copy of Mawlānāzādah Aḥmad ibn Maḥmūd al-Harawī al-Kharzīyānī's commentary on al-Abharī's Hidāyat al-ḥikmah."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 611', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.316, Sharḥ Ḥikmat al-ʻayn copied by Ismāʻīl al-Payāsī ( İsmail el-Peyâsî ) [al-Bayāsī, el-Beyâsî] in the madrasah of Mullā Aḥmad al-Chillī (Molla Ahmet el-Çillî) with transcription completed 3 Shaʻbān 1035 [ca. 30 April 1626]. As appears at close of ḥāshiyah on p.489, transcription completed 1036 [1626 or 7].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and label on fore edge flap "IL 191" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in laid, comb marbled paper (in orange, blue, etc., see flap) with black leather over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins (framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; fore edge flap lined in textile [linen ?] with stripes in green, purple, and white ; sewn in dull pink or light brown thread, two stations ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of leather and paper, delamination and losses of boards, some pest damage, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of two main types ; opening work mainly in a paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 17-32 mm. apart (horizontal), and cross in an inverted teardrop watermark with letters below (55 mm. tall, see p.30, 31, 291, etc.), fairly thin and transluscent though sturdy, medium cream in color, well-burnished to glossy ; second work mainly in a paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), and anchor in circle with trefoil above watermark (see p.318, 320, etc.), sturdy and well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Some abbreviation symbols rubricated ; overlining and textual dividers in the form of three inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; four elegant Turkish hands ; bold, though compact, and virtually serifless with characteristic inclination to the right and slight effect of words descending to baseline, as well as exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 19 and 21-22 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 15 V(150), IV+1 (159), IV (167), V (177), 2 IV(193), 3 V(223), 3 IV(247), i ; Chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (Sharḥ Ḥikmat al-ʻayn) ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (Ḥāshiyat Mīrzā Jān) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (entire volume), supplied during digitization (mistakenly skips two pages each between p.73-74 and p.401-402).', 'Colophon: [Sharḥ Ḥikmat al-ʻayn] "Scribal," reads "قد وقع الفراغ من تحرير هذه النسخة الشريفة المسماة بشرح حكمة العين في شهر شعبان في اليوم الثلاثة في وقت الضحى في ... في مدرسة ملا احمد الچلي سلمه [؟] الله العلي في تاريخ خمس وثلثين والف على يد اضعف الطلاب المحتاج الى رحمة الرب الغني غفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه اجمعين امين يا مجيب السائلين اسماعيل الپياسى"', 'Explicit: [Sharḥ Ḥikmat al-ʻayn] "وليكن هذا اخر ما نورده في العلم الالهي ويتلوه القسم الثاني في الطبيعي والحمد لله على الاتمام وصلواته على محمد واله الاكرام وليكن هذا اخر ما اوردنا ايراده في شرح هذا القسم ولواهب العقل والحياة ومفيض العدل والخيرات حمد لا يعد ولا يحصى ... امين يا رب العالمين" ; [Ḥāshiyat Mīrzā Jān] "فليزم ان لا يقدر العقل على تعقلهما هذا اخر ما تيسر لي في الابحاث المتعلقة بمباحث الامور العامة والحمد لله مفيض الخير والكرامة نسأل الله تعالى ان يوفقني الاتمام ما في الكتاب والصلوة والسلام على افضل روي الحكمة وفضل الخطاب تمت الحاشية الشريفة المنسوبة الى المولى المحقق والهمام المدقق مولانا ميزا جان رحمة الله عليه والرضوان المتعلقة على شرح حكمة العين تاريخ سنة ۱۰۳۶"', 'Incipit: [Sharḥ Ḥikmat al-ʻayn] "اما بعد حمد الله فاطر ذوات العقول ... فان المولى الفاضل والحكيم الكامل شمس الملة والدين محمد بن مبارك شاه البخاري يقول قد التمس مني بعض اخواني في الدين ... ان اكتب لكتاب حكمة العين من مصنفات المولى العلامة ... نجم الملة والدين علي بن عمر الكاتبي القزويني ... شرحا يذلل عن الالفاظ صعابها ويكشف عن وجه المعاني التي فيها نقابها ..." ; [Ḥāshiyat Mīrzā Jān] "قوله [قال] ... الشاملة للمجرد والمادي ومقابلاتها اقول يحتمل ان يكون مقابلتها معطوفا ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.490 : [blank].', '3. p.318-p.489 : [Ḥāshiyat Mīrzā Jān ʻalá Sharḥ Ḥikmat al-ʻayn] / Mīrzā Jān Ḥabīb Allāh al-Shīrāzī al-Bāghandī.', '2. p.317 : [contents listing for Ḥāshiyat Mīrzā Jān].', '1. p.2-p.316 : Sharḥ Ḥikmat al-ʻayn / Muḥammad ʻAlī ibn Mubārakshāh al-Bukhārī.', "Fine copy of the commentary by Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Mubārakshāh al-Bukhārī (d. ca. 1340) on Ḥikmat al-ʻayn, a treatise on metaphysics and the natural sciences by Najm al-Dīn ʻAlī ibn ʻUmar al-Kātibī al-Qazwīnī (d.1276), followed by the gloss of Mīrzā Jān Ḥabīb Allāh al-Shīrāzī al-Bāghandī (d.1586) on Ibn Mubārakshāh's commentary."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 121', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests latter 17th century (post 1650).', 'Accompanying materials: Slip with writing exercises (paginated pp.121-122).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 66. Hikmat al-ain, with commentary."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in beige laid paper ; doublure hinges in brown leather ; upper and lower covers bear blind-stamped scalloped mandorla and pendants with floral vegetal composition (compare Déroche class. OSd 1), accompanied by border in tooled fillets framing a series of s-shaped stamps ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations, though most quires are quite loose ; worked endbands in red and green, in poor condition ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, some lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; numerous repairs in tan leather ; quite ill-fitting and perhaps originally intended for a smaller codex.', 'Support: European laid paper with 14-15 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced roughly 24 mm. apart (horizontal) ; foolscap watermark (similar to Heawood 2022) ; fairly thick and burnished ; two added bifiolia (see pp.105-108 and pp.159-162) in a different European laid paper ; much tearing, staining, and moisture damage.', 'Decoration: Section headings, keywords, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; overlining and textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; bold Turkish (?) hand with Persianate features ; virtually serifless ; both open and closed counters ; tapered descenders ; kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred with shaqq appearing even on final kāf ; lām alif ligature in which the tail of the lām curves around and descends to form the alif, terminating at the base of the lām and thus forming a closed loop ; dot of final nūn set low in bowl ; pointing mainly in bold distinct dots ; occasionally two dots appear as inverted comma ; rounded but upright ; mainly adhering to baseline but occasional descent letters or words to baseline.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: 6 IV (48), V (58), 2 IV(74), V (84), 10 IV (164) ; chiefly quaternions ; final word of last line of verso repeated at the beginning of the first line on following recto, but lacking in some sections ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert and mistakenly skips two pages between pp.195-196).', 'Explicit: "وان اردتم ما لا يتقسم الى اجزاء مختلفة بل متشابهة"', 'Incipit: "اما بعد حمدا لله فاطر ذوات العقول النورية ومظهر خفيات اسرار الربوبية ... فان المولى العلامة ملك المحققين افضل المتاخرين شمس الملة والدين محمد بن المباركشاه البخاري ... يقول قد التمس مني بعض اخواني في الدين ... ان اكتب لكتاب حكمة العين ... شرحا يذلل من الالفاظ صعابها ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the commentary by Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Mubārakshāh al-Bukhārī (d. ca. 740/1340) on Ḥikmat al-ʻayn, the work of metaphysics and natural sciences by Najm al-Dīn ʻAlī ibn ʻUmar al-Kātibī al-Qazwīnī (d. 657/1276). Ends abruptly in "al-Baḥth al-thālith fī ithbāt al-nafs al-nāṭiqah".'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 533', "Origin: As appears in colophon on p.141, composition completed by the author, Muḥammad ibn al-Ṭayyib ibn Muḥammad al-Fāsī al-Madanī, 9 Ṣafar 1152 [ca. 18 May 1739] in his house in Medina under al-Minārah al-Sulaymānīyah of the Prophet's mosque (المسجد النبوي). Date of transcription for this copy not specified, though paper, etc. suggests mid 18th century, possibly ca. 1743.", 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and label on lower cover "IL 190" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards (quite thin, semi-limp) covered in red leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry tooled border in gold ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations ; sewn in light yellow thread, two stations ; only primaries (in light pink) remain of endbands ; overall in fair condition with staining, abrasion, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper mainly with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks including wreath with vase [?] (see p.8, etc.), crown and grapes (see p.35), and "FIN DE P CARTELIER A PERU ... 1743 [?]" ; another type with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of grapes (raisin) with cartouche and crown above (see p.132, 134, 135, 137, etc.) ; beige in color, thin and transluscent though quite sturdy, well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by gold rule-border, elsewhere surrounded by red rule-border.', "Script: Naskh ; elegant 'Syrian' or Turkish hand ; mainly seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on most ascender letters (including free-standing alif), slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes (or conjoined dots) rather than distinct dots, etc.", 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 6 V(60), IV+1 (69) ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," triangular, reads "قال مؤلفه عبد الله تعالى الفقير الى عفوه ومغفرته محمد بن الطيب بن محمد الفاسي ثم المدني كان الله له وجعله ممن لولائه اهله وافق الفراغ منه ضحوة الاثنين التاسع من صفر الخير عام اثنين وخمسين ومائة والف بمنزلي بالمدينة المنورة تحت المنارة السليمانية من المسجد النبوي الشريف صلى الله وسلم على مشرفه وعلى اله وصحبه انتهى بحمد الله ..."', 'Explicit: "فمن زحزح عن النار وادخل الجنة فقد فاز بالنصير وجاء الفتح"', 'Incipit: "يا من احزابه لم تزل مؤيدة على الاعداء منصورة ... وبعد فقد سألني بعض نجباء الاصحاب المولعين بقرأة الاحزاب ان اقيد على حزب الامام الكبير العارف بالله تعالى محيي الدين ابي زكريا يحيى ابن شرف النووي ... ما يكون لحفاظه كالشرح لالفاظه ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.5).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of a commentary by Muḥammad ibn al-Ṭayyib ibn Muḥammad al-Fāsī (d.1756) on the Ḥizb (liturgy, prayers) of Abū Zakarīyā Yaḥyá ibn Sharaf al-Nawawī (d. 1277), followed by a condensed version of the Ḥizb (p.142).'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Large circle with GB(?) in roman.', 'Contains tables and astrological diagrams.', 'In Maghribī script.', 'Text rubricated; marginal corrections in other hands; vol. has edge title.', "End date from owners' marks on p. [1].", 'For another commentary on this poem by this author, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 714.', 'Pp. [2-102]. Bound with: Abū Maʻshar, Kitab qirānāt al-kawākib, pp. [107-123].', 'Commentary on the Urjūzat al-qawāʻid fī al-qaḍāyā al-nujūmīyah, a poem on astrology by ʻAlī ibn Abī al-Rijāl al-Shaybānī. Begins with a long dedication to the wazīr Abū Yaḥyá Abī Bakr.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 609', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at conclusion of final gloss, transcription completed ("wa-qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min taḥrīr hādhihi al-nuskhah...") end of Muḥarram 897 [December 1491], which would imply quite an early copy. Other sections appear to be contemporary with this final gloss.', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From front flyleaf (p.1) and spine label "IL 183" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (mainly in light blue, salmon, light yellow) with black textile over spine (quarter binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in purple wove paper ; resewn in white thread, six stations ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, deterioration of textile, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper of perhaps several types ; opening type with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines (horizontal) grouped in threes with 10-11 mm. between chains and 39 mm. between groups, possible group of four at 27 mm. from adjacent group of three ; another type with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical, quite distinct) and chain lines (horizontal) grouped in threes (and perhaps fours) with 10 mm. between chains and 28-40 mm. between groups (see p.80, 94, etc.) ; at close, a type very similar to the opening if not the same with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines (horizontal) grouped in threes (and perhaps fours) with 9-10 mm. between chains and 39-42 mm. between groups ; all thin and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; written area and occasional marginalia surrounded by red rule-border in opening three works ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh ; three fine Turkish or Persianate hands ; Sharḥ Īsāghūjī and opening Ḥāshiyat al-Bardaʻī (through p.76) in a fine naskh, serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline, free assimilation of letters (initial kāf and following alif, point of final nūn with bowl, alif lām of definite article, etc.), somewhat elongated in the vertical, shaqq of kāf often sweeping dramatically upwards, pointing (of multiple dots) mainly in strokes rather than distinct dots ; second ḥāshiyah (of Qarajah Aḥmad, pp.80-114) in a compact and delicate naskh, partially but irregularly seriffed with marked tilt to the left, mainly curvilinear descenders (rightward descenders tapered and sweeping somewhat dramatically) ; final ḥāshiyah (also of al-Bardaʻī, pp.120-140) in a bold, compact naskh, serifless with effect of tilt to the left (mainly) and of words descending to baseline, some extension of horizontal strokes, freely ligatured.', 'Layout: Written in 15, 16 and 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, V-1 (9), 2 V(29), IV (37), 2 V(57), VI (69), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: [Ḥāshiyah ʻalá Sharḥ Īsāghūjī] "تمت الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب كاتبه كشفى [؟] بن عيسى ..." ; [Ḥāshiyat al-Bardaʻī] "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمت بعون الله وحسن التوفيق وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله اجمعين قد وقع الفراغ من تحرير هذه النسخة في اخر شهر محرم من شهور سنة سبع وتسعين وثمانمائة تم اين نبشتم تا بماند روزگار من نمانم اين بماند يادگار"', 'Incipit: [Sharḥ Īsāghūjī] "الحمد لله الواجب وجوده الممتنع نظيره الممكن سواه وغيره ... وبعد فان كتاب الشيخ الامام قدوة الحكماء اثير الدين الابهري ... الشهير بايساغوجي لما كان علي بعض الاخوان متعسرا ونقضه [؟ وعلى بعضهم] متيسر [متيسرا] اردت ان اكتب بالتماسهم اوراقا لتنزيل تعسره وتعمم تيسره ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.3).", 'Ms. composite codex.', '7. p.120- p.140 : [Ḥāshiyat al-Bardaʻī] / Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Bardaʻī.', '6. p.115-p.119 : [originally left blank, now carry a few brief excerpts].', '5. p.80-p.114 : [Ḥāshiyah ʻalá Sharḥ Īsāghūjī] / Qarajah Aḥmad.', '4. p.75-p.79 : [originally left blank, now carry a few brief excerpts].', '3. p.48-p.76 : [Ḥāshiyat al-Bardaʻī] / Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Bardaʻī.', '2. p.47: [originally left blank, now carries a few excerpts].', '1. p.4-p.46 : Sharḥ Īsāghūjī / Ḥusām al-Dīn Ḥasan al-Kātī.', "Fine composite copy of the commentary by Ḥusām al-Dīn Ḥasan al-Kātī (d.1359) on the Īsāghūjī, a collection of definitions for terms used in logic adapted from the Isagoge of Porphyry by Athīr al-Dīn al-Abharī (d. between 1263-5), followed in the same hand by the gloss [lacking preface] upon al-Kātī's commentary by al-Bardaʻī (d.1521), next the gloss of Qarajah Aḥmad (d.1450 or 51) in a different hand, and finally in still a different hand, another apparently quite early copy of the gloss by al-Bardaʻī."])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Anchor in circle (?). See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), nos. 1-8.', 'Contains astronomical diagrams.', "Text rubricated and overlined in red; substantial marginal notes and finding aids in hand of copyist; copyist's name on p. [118]: ʻalá yad al-ʻabd al-ḍaʻīf al-muḥtāj ilá raḥmat Allāh ʻAlī ibn Walī Allāh; vol. has edge title.", 'Date in colophon: tamma bi-ḥamd Allāh wa-mannihi suʾiltu ʻan tārīkhihi qultu la-hum wa-arrakhū li-tārīkh al-muṣannaf wa-qad waqaʻa al-farāgh ʻan taḥrīr hādhihi al-muskhah al-sarīfah al-mubārakah al-mansūbah ilá Qāḍī Zādah al-Rūmī al-musammāh bi-Sharḥ al-Jighmīnī fī tārīkh wāḥid wa-ʻishrīn wa-alf fī shahr Ramaḍān sanat 1020 sanat 1020 Ramaḍān [i.e. November-December 1611].', 'For other copies of this text, see Mich. Isl. Mss. 754, 755, and 805,4.', 'Pp. [1-118]. Bound with: Niẓām al-Dīn ʻAbd al-ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad al-Birjandī, Ḥāshiyah ʻalá sharḥ al-mulakhkhaṣ fī al-hayʾah, pp. [121-455].', 'Commentary on al-Jighmīnī\'s Mulakhkhaṣ fī al-hayʾah, "a treatise on theoretical astronomy ... compiled in 618 H [i.e. 1221 or 2]." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 158.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 581', 'Origin: As appears in colophon, pp.25-26, transcription completed 25 Ramaḍān 1097 [ca. 15 August 1686].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.1-2) -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From front cover, \'title page\' (p.5) and label on lower cover, "IL 193" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Wove paper cover (light brown, single sheet, crisp and transluscent, limp binding without boards) ; sewn in light blue thread, four stations ; cover ill-fitting and in somewhat poor condition with tears, staining, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (horizontal), and crown-star-crescent watermark (roughly 85 mm. tall, see p.16, 17, etc.) ; dark cream in color, sturdy, well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Keywords, abbreviation symbols, and text being commented upon rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', "Script: Naskh ; angular Egyptian or 'Syrian' hand ; partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serif appearing occasionally on free-standing alif, slight effect of tilt to left and of words descending to baseline, many rectilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots, elongation of horizontal strokes, kāf mashqūqah preferred, final nūn quite round with dot set deep in bowl, somewhat freely ligatured.", 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V+1 (11) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "وكان الفراغ من كتابة هذا الشرح المبارك يوم الخميس المبارك خامس عشرين شهر رمضان الكريم من سنة سبعة وتسعين والف من الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها افضل الصلاة وازكى السلام وعلى اله"', 'Explicit: "قيل فالاول اخص مطلقا وفيه نظر اذ لو سلمناه يمكن تصادقهما وانفراد كل منهما فيكون كل منهما اعم من الاخر من وجه والله سبحانه وتعالى اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد النبي الامي وعلى اله واصحابه وعلى سائر الانبياء والمرسلين وعلى آل كل وصحب كل والتابعين لهم باحسان الى يوم الدين وسلم [؟] وسلام على المرسلين والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "لما كان تأليف هذا الكتاب امرا ذا بال اي شان يهتم به وكلما هو كذلك تطلب فيه البدأة بالبسملة ..."', "Title from 'title page' (p.5).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Clear copy of a commentary on the preface of the Mukhtaṣar, the renowned compendium of Mālikī law by Khalīl ibn Isḥāq al-Mālikī, Ibn al-Jundī (d.1365 or 1374?).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 79', 'Origin: [1] According to colophon on fol.199a, first part copied by Saʻīd ibn Ḥājjī ibn Sayyid ʻAlī Bik ibn Qaʻlī [?] Bik. Copying finished Muḥarram 854 [February-March 1450] ; [2] according to colophon on fol.343a, second part copied by Ḥājjī ʻAlī ibn Sayyid ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad. Copying finished Jumādá II 867 [February 1463].', 'Accompanying materials: Slip with reading notes, quotes (inserted between fol.185 and 186).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 58. Majma al-bahrain, with commentary."', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in dark brown (to black) leather and now edged in brown leather (leather faced and edged framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in bright green surface-dyed, coated paper ; upper and lower covers carry large gold-stamped mandorla with pendants ; design continues on flap ; now sewn in golden yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in golden yellow and red, good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, minor pest damage, etc. ; repairs (subtle fills and edging).', 'Support: mainly non-European (likely Arab) laid paper of a few types ; opening part in a type with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, indistinct) and chain lines grouped (likely in threes) with 9-11 mm. between chains and 33-40 mm. between groups (see p.344, 350, etc.), cloudy furnish, quite sturdy, fairly thick, well-burnished ; second part in a type with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct) and chain lines grouped in threes (see p.512) with 10-11 mm. between the chains and 47-50 mm. between groups, somewhat cloudy furnish, quite sturdy, well-burnished ; a few replacement gatherings on European laid paper with three crescent watermark (see fol.86, 88, 90, etc.).', 'Decoration: Text rubricated, overlining and section headings in red ink; some overlining in green (see fol.317ab, etc.).', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) ; several Turkish hands ; colophons in taʻlīq ; distinct hand for each part and several hands in first part, particularly distinct for quires of European laid paper added later (replacement leaves).', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; impression of ruling board evident.', 'Collation: i, I+1 (3), III+1 (10), IV (18), V (28), 7 IV (84), III+1 (91), 13 IV (195), II (199), 3 V (229), IV (237), II (241), 9 V (331), VI (343), ii ; first part chiefly quaternions, second part chiefly quinions ; divided into two parts, foliation in black ink with Hindu-Arabic numerals distinct for each part ; foliation of first part is corrected in red ink to account for two quires inserted later ; pagination in pencil with Hindu-Arabic numerals (top center of each page) is continuous ; continuous pagination in pencil with Western numerals added later; catchwords present.', 'Colophon: [1] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم المآب [؟] لحسن التوفيق وقد وقع الفراغ لكتاب ... [؟] النسخة الشريفة ... [؟] على يد العبد الضعيف النحيف المحتاج [؟] الراجي الى رحمة ربه ... وكاتبه سعيد بن حاجي بن سيد علي بك بن قعل بك في قرى كلاجوك ... [؟] غفر الله لهم ولوالديهم ولجميع المسلمين والمسلمات وقد وقعه ... [؟] النسخة الشريفة ... [؟] شهر محرم في ... [؟] تم سنة اربعة وخمسين وثماني مائة" ; [2] "scribal," rectangular, reads: "تم المآب بعون الله الملك الوهاب للمؤمنين سبيل الصواب وقد وقع الفراغ من ... النسخة الشريفة ... امين يا رب العالمين على يد العبد الضعيف النخيف الراجي الى رحمة ربه اللطيف حاجي على ابن سيد على ابن محمد غفر الله لهم ولوالديهم ولجميع المسلمين والمسلمات والمؤمنين والمؤمنات في اوائل جمادى الاخير ليلة الجمعة [?] ... سنة سبعة وستين وثمانمائة."', 'Explicit: "واجازها محمد حملا لكلامه الى الصرف الى مصالحة تصحيحا له تم"', 'Incipit: "يا من لا يحوط كمال كماله نطاق وصف الصفحاء [كذا, اي الفصحاء] ... وبعد يقول الضعيف النحيف المديني [؟] عبد اللطيف بن عبد العزيز بن امين الدين ختم الله بالخير عمله ... الحمد لله ابتداء المصنف رحمه الله باول تصنيفه بالتحميد اقتداء بكتاب الله الحميد"', "Title from 'title page' on fol.4a.", 'Ms. codex.', 'Commentary on Majmaʻ al-Baḥrayn by Ibn al-Sāʻātī (d. 696/1296), a compendium on Ḥanafī law, based on the Mukhtaṣar of al-Qudūrī (d. 428/1037) and the Manẓūmah of al-Nasafī (d. 537/1142). Arranged as two volumes in one.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 80', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.388, first section copied by Muḥammad ibn Ḥājj Faraj ibn Amīr ibn Darvīshān [?] with transcription completed ("waqaʻa al-farāgh min taḥrīr hādhihi al-nuskhah al-sharīfah al-mubārakah...") in Shaʻbān 863 [June-July 1459]. As appears in colophon on p.810, second section copied by Yaʻqūb ibn Saʻādat Yār (یعقوب بن سعادت یار) with date of transcription not specified, though likely contemporary with opening section.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Scrap of European laid paper (portion of three circles watermark visible) carrying text opening "الحمد لله الحمد لله الذي لا مالك للدارين الا هو الخالق الذي لا خالق للكونين الا هول ..." (paginated pp.25-26) -- b. Slip of European laid paper with notes and excerpts (paginated pp.121-122) -- c. Scrap carrying glosses (paginated pp.169-170) -- d. Scrap with notes in Turkish (paginated pp.277-278) -- e. Scrap of European laid paper with notes (paginated pp.355-356) -- f. Scrap of European laid paper with glosses (paginated pp.445-446).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 117. Majma al-bahrain."', "Binding: Pasteboards coverd in dark brown (to black) leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures, interior of envelope flap, and some repairs (at fore edge flap and spine) in dark red brown leather ; upper and lower covers carry blind-tooled mandorla divided to three fields filled with interlace design, bordered in interlace band and with fleuron pendants faintly visible (compare Weisweiler 89-95), as well as tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; overall in poor condition with much abrasion, lifting and cracking of leather, boards delaminating, moisture damage, spine slant (cocked), etc. ; cover quite ill-fitting (small) ; repairs (see spine, fore edge, etc.) and reinforcements (see lower doublure) in leather and recycled paper (manuscript 'waste').", 'Support: non-European and European laid paper ; opening section mainly in a non-European laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct) and chain lines (vertical) possibly grouped with roughly 15 mm. between the chains (see pp.108/117), sturdy and dense though transluscent, well-burnished, medium cream in color, thread visible in leaf carrying p.213 ; second section mainly in a non-European laid paper with roughly 10 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, fairly distinct) and chain lines (vertical) possibly grouped with roughly 14-17 mm. between chains, some inclusions visible, sturdy, transluscent, well-burnished ; replacement leaves at opening of second section (pp.389-394) and repairs in a later European laid paper with crown-star-crescent watermark visible (see p.394) ; table of contents (dated 1098 [1686 or 7]) on still another paper with different crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.4) ; staining and tide lines ; tears in a few leaves, likely artifact of burnishing process, in some cases lines of text adjusted around tear (see pp.575-575 and 687-688).', 'Decoration: Headings, text being commented upon, etc. rubricated (mainly first section) ; overlining (in red, first section and opening of second section, elsewhere in black) ; some headings set off by rubricated floral or interlace accents (see p.45, 84, etc.), ansae (p.91, 106, etc.) or full rectangular headpieces filled with geometric designs incorporating the word "كتاب" (see pp.116, 146, 162, 203, 262, 276, and 282), chiefly in red and black (or black only).', 'Script: Naskh ; two main Turkish hands, one for each section, with replacement leaves and repairs in still another hand ; main hand of first section virtually sans serif, kāf mabsūṭah preferred, slight effect of slant to left, some swooping descenders, point of final nūn set deep within bowl by which it is often fully encircled, freely ligatured, pointing in both distinct dots and curved strokes ; main hand of second section compact and virtually sans serif, elongated in the vertical, freely ligatured, with curvilinear descenders, pointing in curved strokes rather than distinct dots, point of final nūn set deep within nearly circular bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 29 lines per page (text of final line often entered on the diagonal) ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: I (2), IV+2 (12), 9 IV(84), IV+1 (93), III (99), IV (107), III (113), 3 IV(137), IV+1 (146), 2 IV(162), III (168), 2 IV(184), IV-2 (190), 4 IV(222), IV+1 (231), 21 IV(399), II-1 (402) ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and mistakenly repeats pp.26-27 and skips two pages between pp.415-416).', 'Colophon: [1] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب على يد الاضعف [كذا] العباد واحوجهم الى رحمة الله المعبود محمد بن حاج فرج بن امير بن [؟] درويشان غفر لهم وقع الفراغ من تحرير هذه النسخة الشريفة المباركة بعون الله تعالى وحسن توفيقه في شهر الله المبارك شعبان في يوم المبارك الثلثاء في وقت الضحوة الكبرى في تاريخ [؟] سنة ثلث وستين وثمانمائة من هجرة النبوية [كذا] صلى الله عليه وسلم ... هر که خواند دعا طمع دارم زان که من بنده گنه کارم" ; [2] "Scribal," reads: "هذا اخر الكلام حرره العبد الضعيف المذنب الراجي الى غفران الله الملك المبارك يعقوب بن سعادت يار غفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه"', 'Explicit: "واجازها محمد حملا لكلامه الى الصرف الى مصالحة تصحيحا له"', 'Incipit: "كتاب الطهارة اختار لفظ كتاب على باب لان فيه معنى الجمع يقال كتبت الخيراي جمعت..."', 'Title from inscription on fol.3a (p.5).', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Firişteoğlu's (Firiştezade, ʻAbd al-Laṭīf ibn ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz al-shahīr bi-Ibn Malak) commentary on Majmaʻ al-Baḥrayn of Ibn al-Sāʻātī (d. 696/1296), a compendium on Ḥanafī law, based on the Mukhtaṣar of al-Qudūrī (d. 428/1037) and the Manẓūmah of al-Nasafī (d. 537/1142). Arranged in two sections within the single volume with leaves between left blank. Second section opens with Kitāb al-Waqf (see p.390). Table of contents provided at opening (pp.2-4) dated 1098 [1686 or 7]."])

en: (count: ["Text is written in nastaʻlīq shekasteh script in black ink with some red. The initial page, which seems to have been added later when the codex was rebound, contains the title of the work and a brief sketch of the author's life and works in Persian, written in blue ink in nastaʻlīq script. These notes also present the same information about the time and place of production of this codex as is presented on the last page of the manuscript(noted above). In addition, written in English cursive in pencil, this page contains a note which states, erroneously, that this codex is the Masnavi of Jalal al-Din Rumi.", 'Last page of the manuscript states that this copy was made in the 12th year of the reign of Khān Muhammad Awrangābādī, more commonly known as Awrangzeyb, the Mughal Emperor. Awrangzeyb reigned from 1658-1707; thus this manuscript must have been completed in 1080/1670 in India. The codex does not have original binding; it has clearly been rebound, probably in the 19th century with a plain binding; many of the pages have been remounted on a different kind of paper. There is no title page on the original paper.', "Vāʻiẓ Kāshifī's florid Persian version of the 8th century Arabic book of fables, Kalīlah wa Dimnah, by Ibn al-Muqaffaʻ, which is itself a translation of the Pahlavī version of the original Sanskrit work by Bidpai. Kāshifī's Anvār-i Suhaylī has been published many times, sometimes under the Arabic title, Kalīlah wa Dimnah."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 678', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at close of opening section (p.57), copied by Muḥammad al-Amīn (Mehmet Emin) with transcription completed 1176 [1762 or 3].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From front flyleaf and spine label, "IL 123a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in block-printed paper (repeated square with dots pattern in contrasting blue and white forming a fish scale effect) with brown leather over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins (framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings/doublures in block-printed paper (repeated 8-petaled flower in purple with yellow and pink circle background accents) ; sewn in dull pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and cream, good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, upper cover detaching, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', "Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of grapes (raisin) under crown and name (see p.26, 27, etc.) ; 'gold'-flecked ; break-through at frame in leaf carrying pp.57-58.", 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with cartouche carrying title in red "ديوان باقى افندى رحمة الله عليه" surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) filled with swirling floral vegetal decoration in lavender, pink, orange-red, gold, and red on fields of blue and gold, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue with orange-red accents and all set in a well of lavender with blue crosses ; another illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) on p.68 echoes the first, consisting of rectangular piece with cartouche carrying title in red "ديوان باقى افندى رحمة الله عليه رحمة واسعة" flanked by floral motifs in orange-red, white, lavender and gold on fields of blue and gold, surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) filled with swirling floral vegetal decoration in light blue, lavender, pink, white, orange-red, gold, and red on fields of blue and gold, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue with gold and red accents and all set in a well of pink with blue crosses; written area and two columns within surrounded by gold frame ; keywords, some headings and catchwords rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; at least two elegant, medium hands ; sans serif with effect of words descending to baseline, characteristic letterforms ; final leaves (from p.312) in more of a naskh-nastaʻlīq, slightly more compact, more highly ligatured and partially seriffed with slight effect of words descending to baseline.', 'Layout: Written in roughly 12 lines of verse per page, on the diagonal in two columns with each hemistich to a diagonal line for roughly 24 hemistiches per page ; headings not on the diagonal ; written area divided to two columns to set off the verses.', 'Collation: IV (8), V (18), VII+1 (33), 13 V(163), VI (175) ; chiefly quinions ; several leaves ruled but left blank between opening section and following (pp.58-66), p. 67 carries text that has been crossed out, final leaves also ruled but left blank (pp.345-348) ; catchwords present (rubricated) ; in mid to latter quires, foliation visible in lower outer corner of the verso of each leaf ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (inlcudes back flyleaf).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "كتبه العبد الضعيف المذنب الفقير محمد الامين غفر الله ذنوبه سنه ۱۱۷٦"', 'Explicit: "افرين صد افرين اول طبع كوهر باشنه"', 'Incipit: "بحمد الله شرف بولدى ينه ملك سليمانى جلوس اتدى سعادت تحتنه اسكندر ثانى ..."', 'Title from headpieces at openings on p.2 and p.68.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the collected poems of the celebrated Turkish poet, Baki Efendi (d.1600).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 544', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.429, transcription of final section completed Ṣafar 1052 [May 1642]. Opening section (pp.17-214) likely copied somewhat earlier, perhaps early 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- c. Eighteen inserts mainly carrying glosses (paginated pp.25-26, 29-30, 35-36, 39-40, 43-44, 49-50, 55-56, 59-60, 69-70, 73-74, 79-80, 83-84, 103-104, 111-112, 121-122, 133-134, 147-148, 191-192).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 218" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in once marbled laid paper with dark red-brown leather over edges/turn-ins (likely once also spine and fore edge flap, framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap, now lost) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; sewn in heavy light blue thread, two stations ; overall in poor condition with loss of flap, significant abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, staining, shrinkage, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; earlier section includes type with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (horizontal), and crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.26, 38, 92-93, 160, etc.) and type with 9-10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), and crossbow in circle (trefoil above) watermark (see p.24, 42, etc.) ; later, final section includes type with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 30 mm. apart (horizontal), and a different crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.224, 225, etc.) and a type with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), and anchor in circle watermark (see p.330, etc.) ; some leaves tinted yellow.', 'Decoration: Keywords and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; overlining in red ; in early section text of written area surrounded by red rule-border (pp.17-214) ; some textual dividers in the form of red dots.', 'Script: Naskh ; at least two elegant Turkish hands ; following replacement leaves at opening (from p.19) an elegant Turkish hand, partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on some ascender letters, effect of tilt to the left, only casually pointed, curvilinear descenders, extension of horizontal strokes, free assimilation of letters (kāf followed by alif, etc.), point of final nūn set deep in bowl (even fully encircled occasionally), alif maqṣūrah often mardūdah, etc. ; from p.215 to close, another elegant though more compact Turkish hand, seriffed (nearly all ascender letters) with sharp tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, free assimilation of letters, and pointing in curves rather than distinct dots ; replacement leaves at opening in still another naskh and a nastaʻlīq (talik).', 'Layout: Written mainly in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V-9+8 (9), 18 V(189), III+2 (197) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "الحمد لله على التمام ولرسوله افضل السلام فرغت عن تنميق هذه النسخة في ان من الزمان ويسر اتمامه في صفر الخير لسنة اثنى وخمسين والف"', 'Explicit: "حتى قتل صار شهيدا لانه يكون بادلا نفسه لعزاز دين الله تعالى ولاقامة حق الشرع تم تم"', 'Incipit: "لله الحي الاحد حمد لا يحتويه الحد على ما اولانا علم الفروع ... اما بعد يقول عبد اللطيف بن فرشته ... ان ارباب البطانة واصحاب الفطانة من خلص احبابي ... قالوا ان كتاب المنار للامام ... حافظ الدين النسفي ... صائر اهالي الامصار انار ... نسألك ان نشرحه شرحا على طريق الحل مختصرا ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. composite codex.', 'Fine composite copy of the commentary by Ferişteoğlu (Feriştehoğlu) Abdullatîf İbn Melek (ʻAbd al-Laṭīf ibn Firishtah, al-maʻrūf bi-Ibn Malak) upon al-Manār fī uṣūl al-fiqh (Manār al-anwār), a concise account of the foundations of law by Abū al-Barakāt ʻAbd Allāh ibn Aḥmad al-Nasafī (d.1310).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 133', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.247, Sharḥ ʻAbd al-Raḥmān copied by Muṣṭafá ibn Ḥasan al-Wāfī [Mustafa Hasan Vafi]. Transcription finished 1132 [1719 or 20]. As appears on p.6, opening work completed 1175 [1761 or 2].', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 62. Marah al-arwah."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in laid paper with red-brown leather over spine, fore-edge flap, and edges/turn-ins ; Type II binding (with flap) ; dark blue-green paper over envelope flap ; upper board lining and interior of envelope flap in pink-tinted laid paper, lower board lining in yellow-tinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers and bear traces of blind-stamped scalloped mandorla, with frame in a series of s-shaped stamps defined by tooled fillets ; design continues on envelope flap ; doublures (board linings) also bear blind-stamped scalloped mandorla with accompanying pendants and cornerpieces, along with border in a series of tooled fillets ; design continues on interior of envelope flap ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations ; worked endbands in red and green, in poor condition ; overall in very poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather (particularly at foreedge flap), severe delamination of boards, staining, upper cover detaching at spine, some negative draw in upper cover, etc. ; various repairs, also damaged.', 'Support: European laid paper with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart (horizontal) ; watermark with crown above bar above grapes or pendant ; lightly sized and burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and abbreviations symbols rubricated ; some notabilia and marginal corrections also in red ink ; textual dividers in the form of red commas.', 'Script: Naskh ; on main clear Turkish hand, some sections likely supplied in other hands ; mainly serifless ; very slight effect of tilt to the left, occasionally more exaggerated ; mainly closed counters ; occasional hāʼ mudghamah looking like two inverted commas ; occasional very slight effect of words descending to baseline ; many descenders tapered ; final yāʼ and alif maqsūrah mardūdah ; some variation in line thickness.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, I (2), 11 V(112), IV (120), III (126) ; chiefly quinions ; final three leaves originally left blank ; lacks proper catchwords but but last word of final line on the verso of each leaf is usually repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf and skips two pages between pp.239-240).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت هذه النسخة الشريفة المباركة الميمونة بعون الله الملك الوهاب على يد اضعف العباد مصطفى بن حسن الوافي غفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه في سنة اثنى وثلاثون ومائة والف من جهرة [هجرة] النبوية تمت تم تم تم"', 'Explicit: "لكنه لا يعده ايضا لمتابعة للمفرد والذي اجتمع فيه اعلالان اذا اعل عينه [؟] والله اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب"', 'Incipit: [Sharḥ al-Marāḥ] "الحمد لله الذي اطلعنا على كتابه بعلوم العربية والتصريف وحفظ كلامه عن التبديل والتغيير والتحريف وجعل التثبت به بمراح الارواح ... اما بعد فان العبد الذليل عبد الرحمن بن خليل يقول لما اسبغ الله على عباده نعماء لا يحصى عددها ... ومن لطفه علي وافضاله الي ترقي امر بعض اولادي الى قراءة مراح الارواح ... شرحت شرحا يحتوي متنا"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '3. p.248-p.250 : [originally left blank, now carries Qaṣīdah malīḥah fī al-nafs].', '2. p.7-p.247 : Sharḥ al-Marāḥ / ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Khalīl al-Rūmī.', '1. p.4-p.6 : Shayʼan lil-maṣādir al-madhkūrah fī Marāḥ al-arwāḥ.', "Fine copy of a commentary by ʻAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Khalīl on Ibn Masʻūd's textbook of Arabic grammar, Marāḥ al-arwāḥ. Preceded by a very brief anonymous commentary listing the maṣādir of the verbs discussed in the Marāḥ al-arwāḥ and followed by a witty poem."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 985', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest mid to late 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Slip carrying glosses (marked "حاشية") tipped in (paginated pp.8-88).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 134', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "شرح مسعود الرومي | J.H.D." ; edges of text block flecked blue ; sewn in white thread over three recessed cords, quite tightly bound ; overall in good condition.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types, often ; opening type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27-28 mm. apart (horizontal), watermark of three hats (pp.8, 14, 18, etc.) and countermark of "V G" under trefoil (see pp.2, 6, etc.), sturdy though thin and transluscent, medium cream in color, well-burnished ; another type with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (horizontal), crown-star-crescent watermark (see pp.44, 50, 52, etc.), and "V d" / "V b" under trefoil countermark (pp.54, 56, etc.), sturdy, cream in color, only recto of each leaf well-burnished ; another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-28 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of paschal lamb in four lobed circle (see pp.64, 76, 80, etc.), thin and transluscent though sturdy, medium cream in color, well-burnished ; another type with 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of large arms / scrollwork with lion (see pp.104, 106, 112, 114, 122, 128, 130, etc. and compare "Armoiries. Lion" nos.1 and 3 in Velkov, Les Filigranes dans les documents Ottomans: divers types d’images), thin though sturdy, medium cream in color, burnished ; other watermarks appearing include three circles (see pp.26, 36), three crescents / tre lune (see pp.30, 32), and latin cross in heart (see pp.102, 118, 138).', 'Decoration: Headings, keywords and many notabilia (side-heads) rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; overlining in red ; written area surrounded by black or red double rule-border (opening through p.49, 59-113) with margin also surrounded by single rule-border in either black or red (opening through p.49, 59-89).', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, compact Egyptian [?] hand with Turkish features in a thin to medium line, varying slightly in size and compactness with changes in layout but seemingly supplied by the same hand ; serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (particularly dramatic on final line of many pages), curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in strokes or conjoined dots, free assimilation of leters, final or free-standing nūn squat and wide with point set down in or occasionally assimilated with bowl, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 15 lines per page (p.58 in 28 lines anomalously) with varying lines of glosses on the diagonal or in decorative shapes in the ruled margins ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, 2 V(20), 2 V-1(38), 3 V(68), i ; exclusively quinions (two anomalous) ; lacks proper catchwords, but last word(s) of final line on the verso of each leaf is often but irregularly repeated at the beginning of the first line on the following recto ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes tipped-in insert).', 'Explicit: "قوله اعلم ان الحواشي اعلم ان ما نقل عنه في حواش هذا الشرح لما كانت مضبوطة معتمدا عليها عندي الترمت الاشارة اليها في مواضعها ليعتمد عليها المحصلون ويميزها عن غيرها الطالبون ان الله مع الذين اتقوا والذين هم محسنون تمت بعون الله والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على رسوله محمد واله اجمعين وبعد فقد قال الامام المحقق ... مولانا شمس الملة والدين محمد السمرقندي ... المنة علينا من من عليه لواهب افضل النعم التي هي نعمة العقل وذلك الواهب هو الله تع ... هذه رسالة في اداب البحث وطرق المناظرة التي يحتاج اليها كل متعلم ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the commentary by Kamāl al-Dīn Masʻūd al-Shirwānī al-Rūmī (d. 905/1499) on al-Samarqandī’s (13th c.) treatise on disputation, Risālah fī ādāb al-baḥth. Contribution to the cataloguing from Marijana Kavčič.'])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated; marginal corrections and notes in hand of copyist (same as that of 694,2).', 'Date in colophon: wa-katabahu muʾallifuhu al-ʻallāmah Aḥmad ibn ʻAbd al-Fattāḥ al-Mullawī fī Jumādá al-ūlá sanat ithnayn wa-ʻishrīn wa-miʾah wa-alf [June-July 1710].', 'Pp. [1-16]. Bound with: Aḥmad ibn ʻAbd al-Fattāḥ al-Mūjirī al-Mullawī, Taqyīd ʻalá masʾalat zakāt al-nābit, pp. [17-27].', 'On the algebraic determination of the depreciation in the value of slaves sold or distributed as inheritance after the death of their master.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 918', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 67', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "شرح | عبد الرحمن الجامي | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Mainly lined / ruled wove paper of at least two different types ; a few leaves of unruled wove paper.', 'Decoration: Headings and text being commented upon rubricated.', 'Script: Ruqʻah and naskh ; two modern hands ; opening pages in naskh, a spacious, modern hand in a bold line, partially but irregularly seriffed with slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, somewhat freely ligatured, many closed counters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed ; thereafter in ruqʻah, initially (through p.266) a neat hand, serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of inclination to the right, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots ; from p.267 a much quicker, coarser hand with effect of inclination to the right and slight effect of words descending to baseline.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 25-26 lines per page.', 'Collation: Pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "الى هنا انتهى الاصل الذي بيدنا والذي نقلنا منه هذه النبذة ... والاصل هو السفر المسمى بمصباح الانس بين المعقول والمشهود شرح مفتاح غيب الجمع والوجود والشرح للعلامة الفنري [الفناري] والمتن لصدر الدين القنوي تلميذ الشيخ الاكبر بن عربي ... والله الامر في البدء والختم وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم تسليما والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Incipit: [Sharḥ mawlānā ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Jāmī ʻalá Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam] "الحمد لله الذي زين خواتم قلوب اولى الهمم بفصوص نصوص الحكم ... اما بعد فاعلم ان الحكم الفائضة من الحق سبحانه على قلوب كمل عباده ... فقصدت الى جمع شروحه وجعلتها مفاتيح ابواب فتوحه وطالعتها مرة بعد اخرى ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.445-p.446 : [blank].', '3. p.268-p.444 : Min Miṣbāḥ al-uns bayna al-maʻqūl wa-al-mashhūd / Muḥammad ibn Ḥamzah ibn Muḥammad al-Fanārī.', '2. p.267-p.268: Min al-Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikmīyah bi-sharḥ al-Nābulusī / al-Nābulusī.', '1. p.1-p.266 : [Sharḥ mawlānā ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Jāmī ʻalá Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam] / Jāmī.', "Careful copy of a collection of excerpts from three Ṣūfistic and philosophical works opening with Jāmī's (d.1492) commentary upon Ibn ʻArabī’s celebrated Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam, a collection of aphorisms summarizing the teaching of 28 prophets from Adam to Muḥammad, followed by a very brief excerpt from ʻAbd al-Ghanī ibn Ismāʻīl al-Nābulusī's (d.1731) commentary on Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam and closing with a lengthy excerpt from Miṣbāḥ al-uns bayna al-maʻqūl wa-al-mashhūd, Muḥammad ibn Ḥamzah ibn Muḥammad al-Fanārī's (d.1431) commentary on Miftāḥ ghayb al-jamʻ wa-al-wujūd, Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Qūnawī’s (d.1274) chief philosophical work."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1038', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p. 417, copied by ʻAbd al-Qāʼim ibn Hudá [Hady ?] al-Ḥusaynī with transcription completed ("wa-qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min al-kitābah li-rāqimih ...") 15 Jumādá II 994 [ca. 3 June 1586].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Copy of a letter addressed from Makdisi to Jameson, dated 17 November 1976 "Thank you very much for the 3 folios of your manuscript temporarily designated as Makdisi I. I have finally been able to identify this manuscript. It is the Commentary on the Mukhtaṣar by ʻAḍud al-Dīn al-Ījī (died A.H. 756/A.D. 1355) who finished the work in A.H. 734. There are several copies of the same work in the Garrett Collection of the Firestone Library at Princeton University, designated under the following numbers: Garrett 1478, 1479, 1627, 1628, 2170" -- b. Slip with notes in pencil and red ink "MAKDISI – I | Sharḥ Muktaṣar al-uṣūl | Keep in book | 210 leaves (last blank) | 19 cm. | Cannot be filmed."', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 187', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in bright red (upper cover) and deep red (lower cover) leather with spine in brown leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; lower doublure in brown leather ; upper cover carrys blind-stamped mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition) ; sewn in pink thread, two stations, many threads broken, quires loose ; worked chevron endbands in pink and lime green, tail gone, headband damaged ; overall in poor condition with much abrasion, delamination and losses to boards, staining, etc. ; quite ill-fitting and detaching at spine ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 6 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines only sporadically visible, occasionally in group of two (13 mm. apart) ; fairly transluscent, thin though strudy, cloudy formation with many inclusions, well-sized and burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and some abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke overlining keywords) rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; mainly an elegant Persianate or Transoxanian hand in a medium line ; quite compact and serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and somewhat exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, letterforms characteristic of nastaʻlīq, pointing mainly in strokes rather than distinct dots, sīn often marked with three dots below, final yāʼ mainly unpointed and often mardūdah, alif maqṣūrah usually mardūdah ; between p.25 and p.117 supplied in a larger and more spacious hand.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: IV-2 (6), III (12), 5 IV(52), III+1 (59), 18 IV(203), III+1 (210) ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; foliation in pencil, Western numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "وقد وقع الفراغ من الكتابة لراقمه الفقير الحقير المستغفر من ذنبه الراجي الى غفور ربه الغني عبد القائم بن هدى الحسيني عفي عنهما سياتهما بحرمة النبي الامي العربي وآله في يوم الاربعاء الخامس عشر من شهر جمادى الثاني سنة اربع وتسعين وتسعمائة هجرية نبوية مصطفوية عليه افضل السلام والتحية حامدا مصليا ومسلما تم"', 'Explicit: "فما فوقها حصلت امور لا يكاد يحضر و في القدر الذي ذكره ارشاد لذلك ارشدنا الله واياكم لما ينفعنا في الدنيا والاخرة ... انه المستعان وعليه التكلان واتفق الفراغ من تسويده في السادس والعشرين من شعبان لسنة اربع وثلثين وسبعمائة والحمد لله اولا واخرا والصلوة على نبيه محمد واله باطنا وظاهرا وعلى خيار اصحابه رضوان الله عليهم اجمعين"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي برأ الانام وعمهم بالاكرام والدعوة الى دار السلام ... وبعد فان من عناية الله بالعباد ان شرع الاحكام وبين الحلال والحرام ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of al-Ījī's commentary on Ibn al-Ḥājib's (d.1249) Mukhtaṣar al-muntahá, an abridgement of his own treatise on law according to the Mālikī school, Muntahá al-suʼāl wa-al-amal fī ʻilmay al-uṣūl wa-al-jadal."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 62', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.513, copied by Muṣṭafá ibn Ḥasan with transcription completed around noon of the 11th of Jumādá I 961 [ca. 14 April 1554].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with glosses, excerpts, pen trials, etc. tipped in between pp.68-69.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 132. Commentary on Kuduri."', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced with marbled paper and with red-brown leather over spine and board edges / turn-ins (except for head of board); Type III binding (without flap); doublures / board linings in block-printed paper (repeating diamond design, offset in contrasting blue and red); sewn in white thread, two stations, quite sound; worked chevron endbands in yellow and blue; overall in fair condition with moisture damage, back flyleaf adhered to lower cover, staining and minor abrasion.', 'Support: European laid paper with roughly 10 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-32 mm. apart (horizontal), bull\'s head watermark (see p.14, 72, 298, 508, 514, etc.), and countermark of "N P" under trefoil (see p.16, 282, etc.); flyleaves in a different European laid paper (crown, perhaps above grapes, watermark visible in front flyleaf).', 'Decoration: Chapter headings and section headings rubricated, as well as abbreviations in the form of the letters "م" and "ش" to introduce the matn and sharḥ, respectively; also "س" seemingly for suʼāl.', 'Script: Naskh; compact, careful Turkish / Anatolian hand in a medium line; mainly serifless with slight effect of inclination to the left, curvilinear descenders, compactly filling the line but gracefully elongated in the vertical, shaqq of kāf sweeping dramatically upward, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, point of final and free-standing nūn above tall bowl; freely ligatured in text of colophon.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 24 V (240), V+1 (241), IV (259), i ; chiefly quinions; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals skipping initial leaf; catchwords present; pagination added later in pencil, Western numerals.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب على يد العبد الضعيف المحتاج الى رحمة ربه مصطفى بن حسن اعناه الله بلطفه الخفي في وقت الظهر في يوم الحادي عشر في جمادى الاول [كذا] سنة احدى وستين وتسعمائة"', 'Explicit: "فاذا صححت مسئلة المناسخة واردة معرفة ما يصيب كل واحد من جياة الدرهم قسمت صحت منه المسئلة على ثمانية واربعين فما حرج اخذة من سهام كل واحد حبة"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعلنا من حملة كتابه الذي هدي به المتقين ورواه سنيين نبيه محمد خاتم النبيين صلى الله عليه وعلى اله الطيبين كتاب الطهارات..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Mukhtār ibn Maḥmūd al-Zāhidī's (d.1259 or 60) commentary on al-Qudūrī's Mukhtaṣar, a compendium of Ḥanafī law. Many marginal notes."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 104', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests early 17th century.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 126. Work on law."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in once marbled paper with dark brown leather over spine, foreedge flap and edges/turn-ins ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in laid European paper ; sewn in dark yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and blue, headband intact, tailband damaged with half missing ; overall in poor condition with severe abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, staining, moisture damage, pest damage, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal) ; watermarks include crown star crescent (compare Heawood 1132) and three crescents (tre lune) ; thick and burnished ; some blocking, smudging, and staining.', 'Decoration: Section headings rubricated ; overlining of matn in red and black.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine, clear Turkish hand ; virtually serifless ; effect of tilt to the left ; many open counters ; rightward descenders tapered ; pointing in joined dots, forming lines or curves ; point of final nūn often assimilated with bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 15 (pp.1-176), 17 (pp.177-216) and 23 (pp.226-434) lines per page ; frame-ruled.', "Collation: 4 V (40), IV (48), 12 V(168), IV (176), V (186), VI (198), IV+1 (207), V (217) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, opens with folio '۱ ۸' on p.1, visible only on first three leaves ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "فاضرب في اصل المسئلة وعولها ان كانت عائلة فان تساوت للاعداد"', 'Incipit: "ظل كل شيء مثليه لقوله عم ابردوا في الظهر فان شدة مثليه [كذا] فيح جهنم ولان جبرئل عم صلى الظهر في اليوم الثاني حين صار ظل كل مثليه ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine (though defective) copy of Mukhtār ibn Maḥmūd al-Zāhidī's commentary on al-Qudūrī's Mukhtaṣar, a concise manual of Ḥanafī law ; acephalous and ending abruptly with end wanting. See Mich. Isl. Ms. 62 for another ms. copy."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1035', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.90b, copied by Ibn Khayr al-Dīn Shāh Mīr Fatḥ Allāh Yaḥyá al-Ḥusaynī [?] (entered over expunged writing). Transcription finished ("fa-qad faragha min taswīd hādhā al-kitāb...") Wednesday, 20 or 24 Rabīʻ I 1050 [ca. 10 or 14 July 1640]. Scribal verses "كتبتك يا كتاب ولست ادري اذا ما مت من يقرأك بعدي صديقي ام حبيبي ام عدوي فسبحان الذي بالغيب يدري" flank colophon.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 184', "Binding: Pasteboards covered green paper with red leather over spine and board edges / turn-ins ; Type III binding (without flap) ; boards unlined, exposed boards in a light lavender color, each with a portion of a printed label in gold, blue, and white Ottoman design in an inner or outer corner ; the boards were likely taken from a larger piece of material with this label (reused / recycled), the larger piece being divided into four with two pieces each being used to fashion the boards, carrying portions of the label with them ; former owners' inscriptions on interior of upper cover (exposed board) ; overall in somewhat poor condition with upper and lower covers detaching from spine (more pronounced with lower cover).", 'Support: European laid paper with evenly spaced single chain lines running horizontally and spaced roughly 29 mm. apart ; laid lines running vertically and spaced roughly 9 laid lines per cm.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and abbreviation symbols (mainly two-teeth stroke over some keywords) rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas, three dots, numeral khamsah, etc. in black or red ; occasional overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; mainly an elegant Persianate or Iraqi hand ; essentially serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf), pointing in distinct or conjonied dots, curvilinear descenders ; headings and poetic verses being commented upon are in a much heavier, slightly larger script ; partially vocalized throughout.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; mainly single column, divided to two columns where poetic verses are transcribed ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: 3 IV (24), II (28), I (30), I+2 (34), III+1 (41), II(45), 5 IV (85), I (87), II (91) ; mainly quinions ; lacuna of fol.46b (p.92) marked "صحيح" ; catchwords present for certain sections of text only, elsewhere cut off or simply lacking ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "فقد فرغ من تسويد هذا الكتاب في يوم الاربع [كذا] عشرون من شهر ربيع الاول سنة الف وخمسين [؟] الهجرية النبوية عليه افضل الصلوات واكمل التحية على يد اقل عباد الله تراب اقدام المؤمنين ابن خير الدين شاه مير فتح الله يحيى الحسيني [؟] عفي عنهم امين"', 'Explicit: "فتثقل الكلمة فلاجل ذلك اعدلوا الى الفتحة التي هي اخف الحركات فاعرف ذلك وقد تضمنت [كذا] ملحة الاعراب مودعة بدائع الآداب فانظر اليها نظر المستحسنين وحسن الظن بها واحسن وان تجد عيبا فسد الخللا فجل من لا فيه عيب وعلا والحمد لله على ما اولى فنعم ما اولى ونعم المولى ثم الصلوة بعد حمد الصمد على النبي المصطفى محمد واله وصحبه الاخيار والقانتين في الدجى الابرار"', 'Incipit: "اقول من بعد افتتاح القول بحمد ذي الطول شديد الحول وبعده فافضل السلام على النبي سيد الانام واله الاطهار ... الحد ما يمنع المحدود من الخروج عن ما حد به ويمنع غيره من الدخول فيه ومنه اشتقاق حدود الدار والحد لغة المنع ومنه سمي البواب حدادا لمنعه الطارق من الدخول"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "al-Ḥarīrī's (d.516/1122) didactic urjūzah on grammar, accompanied by commentary. Final folio bears a brief excerpt from al-ʻAwāmil al-miʼah, or Miʼat ʻāmil, the popular grammar manual of ʻAbd al-Qāhir al-Jurjānī (d.1078?)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 947', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.122, copied by Aḥmad ibn al-Shaykh Muḥammad al-Ṭayyib with transcription completed 19 Ṣafar 1271 [ca. 11 November 1854].', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 96', 'Binding: Boards covered in textured black cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "قصيدة الحريري ملحة الاعراب" ; sewn in white thread over two recessed cords ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion and staining.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types (all extremely well-burnished) ; opening type with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of scrollwork / arms consisting of two-headed eagle with crown above, star and trefoil at center, and "G. C. C." below (see p.2, 10, 12, etc.), dark cream to beige in color, well-burnished to glossy ; another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of "GIOR MAGNANI" under scrollwork / arms with bird above tower (see p.22, 24, 30, 32, etc. and compare Heawood 3748 and Walz, "The Paper trade of Egypt and the Sudan," p.88), medium cream in color, well-burnished to glossy ; another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of "G M" under scrollwork (see p.50, etc.), dark cream to beige in color, well-burnished to glossy ; some staining, creases and tears.', 'Decoration: Keywords and headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Naskh-nastaʻlīq (talik) ; clear, compact Turkish hand in a medium to bold line ; characteristically serifless with marked inclination to the right, mainly closed counters, some elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ often unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 5 V(50), VI (62), i ; exclusively quinions with final senion ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals under letter kāf in upper margin of recto of opening leaf of each quire ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during digitization).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمت الملحة وشرحها نهار الجمعة المبارك لتسعة عشر يوما مضين من صفر سنة الف ومائتين واحدى وسبعين على يد الفقير الى الله سبحانه احمد بن الشيخ محمد الطيب غفر الله له ولوالديه ولمشايخه وللمسلمين اجمعين امين م"', 'Explicit: "ثم الصلاة بعد حمد الصمد على النبي المصطفى محمد واله وصحبه الاخيار على روام الليل والنهار واله الأئمة الاخيار القانتين في الدجا الابرار"', 'Incipit: "قال الشيخ الامام العالم العلامة ... ابو محمد القاسم بن علي الحريري ... اقول من بعد افتتاح القول بحمد ذي الطول شديد الحول ... الحد ما يمنع الشيء المحدود من الخروج عما حد به ويمنع غيره من الدخول فيه ومنه اشتقاق حدود الدار والحد في اللغة هو المنع ومنه سمي البواب حدادا لانه يمنعه الطارق من الدخول ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' / opening leaf (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of al-Ḥarīrī’s (d.516/1122) didactic urjūzah on grammar, Mulḥat al-iʻrāb, accompanied by commentary.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 405', "Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration etc. would suggest late 16th or possibly early 17th century ; dated ownership statement on 'title page' (p.3) provides a terminus ante quem of 1853.", 'Former shelfmark: "311 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf (p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in brown leather ; upper and lower covers carry stamped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. NSd 7), pendants and cornerpieces ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, damaged but in fair condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly indistinct) and no chain lines visible, crisp, well-sized and burnished, dark cream in color ; much repaired.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.4, consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche (carrying invocation in red "يا قاسم الارزاق بالاستحقاق" ) surrounded by delicate arabesques with floral motifs in gold, lavender, red, turquoise, etc. on a light blue and gold ground, surmounted by a scalloped band of evoking a row of domes filled with same delicate arabesques in gold, pink, lavender, turquoise, red, etc. on grounds of light blue and gold, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in light blue ; another fine illuminated headpiece at opening on p.45 ; written area surrounded by a frame of gold bands defined by black fillets, divisions within (occasionally gold-flecked) defined by narrow gold bands outlined by black fillets ; illuminated tailpiece at close on p.48, consisting of elegant vegetal designs in black and pink with red accents on a gold ground with lapis borders.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; bold, elegant Ottoman hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page, with written area mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 2 IV(16), III (22), 1 (23), i ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present (though occasionally obscured by repairs) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Explicit: "كه بحر خاك نيست مظهر كل"', 'Incipit: "ينه شوقم بلوردى جوشم وار موج دريا كبى خروشم وار ..."', 'Title from inscription on upper doublure.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Dīvān (collected poems) of Hüseyin Celâl Bey, known as Celâlî (1517-1571), see Türk dili ve edebiyatı ansiklopedisi (1977), ii, p.26.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 939', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.403, transcription completed 1 Rabīʻ I 1354 [ca. 3 June 1935] corresponding to "الثالث عشر من شهر يونيو من شهور سنة الف وتسعمائة واربعة وثلاثين الميلادية" [perhaps 3 June 1935 was intended]. Copy apparently made from a printed edition (likely the Tehran 1319/1901 edition which had Sharḥ al-ʻArshīyah on the margins of Asrār al-āyāt wa-anwār al-bayyināt, see publisher\'s preface on p.202). Likely copied in Egypt and eventually bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 88', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "شرح رسالة | الحكمة العرشية | ملا اسماعيل بن السميع| J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Wove paper of at least three different types (trimmed to different sizes), lined and unlined.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a medium to bold line (line thickness changes) ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 23-27 lines per page.', 'Collation: Verso of a few leaves left blank (i.e. writing only on one side, mainly due to bleed through of ink, see p.242, etc.) ; several leaves recycled (i.e. consist of reused manuscript \'waste\') with text in pencil now written over (reminiscent of a palimpsest, sometimes running in a different direction, see pp.118, 120, 230, 232), or in black ink now crossed through (see p.231), or on verso (as in the case of the incomplete text of a letter addressed to al-nāʼib al-ʻāmm in the name of al-Sitt Muḥsinah ʻAbd Allāh zawjat al-marḥūm ʻAbduh Afandī Amīn, regarding a pesky "tenant" at her home in al-Khurunfish, see p.256) ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "تمت هذه النسخة الشريفة المسماة باسرار الآيات وانوار البينات لخاتمة المحققين وفخر المدققين صدر الحق والملة والعلم والدين المعروف بملا صدرا وكان تمام تسويدها في اول ربيع الاول من شهور سنة اربع وخمسين بعد الالف والثلثمائة الهجرية المطابق للثالث عشر من شهر يونيو من شهور سنة الف وتسعمائة واربعة وثلاثين الميلادية والله اسأل ان ينفع بهذه النسخة كل من وقفت بيده وصارت الى خير ملكه انه سميع مجيب قدير قريب آمين"', 'Incipit: [Sharḥ Risālat al-Ḥikmah al-ʻarshīyah al-Ṣadrīyah] "الحمد لله وزان علمه وكفى والصلاة على عباده الذين اصطفى وبعد فان الرسالة الموسومة بالعرشية من مصنفات صدر متألهة الاسلام ... صدر الحق والحقيقة والملة والدين محمد ابن ابراهيم المعروف بصدر المتألهين ... قد شرحها الشيخ احمد الاحسائي ولكن لم يأت في شرحها الا جرحا ولم يزد عليها الا خفاء وقدحا ... فاظهر الله المعالم الكامل ... محمد بن اسماعيل بن السميع ... فشرح الرسالة المذكورة شرحا يزيل الصعاب ... هذا شرح العرشية لخاتم الحكماء الآلهيين ملا اسماعيل بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الحمد لله الذي خلقنا بقدرته ثم هدانا الى سبيل معرفته ... وبعد فيقول اقل الخلائق جرما واكثرهم جرما العبد الذليل ... محمد اسماعيل بن السميع ... اني لما رأيت الرسالة الشريفة الموسومة بالحكمة العرشية للمولى الفاضل ... صدر الحكماء والمتألهين ... محمد بن ابراهيم المعروف بصدر الدين ..." ; [Asrār al-āyāt] "نحمدك اللهم يا من تحيرت في بيداء كبريائه الالباب وغرقت في بحار معرفته عقول الاولياء والاقطاب ... هذا كتاب اسرار الآيات وانوار البينات ... نحمدك اللهم يا من بيدك ملكوت الارض والسماء واليه تتشوق الاكوان والآثار ... اما بعد فيقول انزل خلق الله واحوجهم الى كرامة رب العالمين محمد المدعو بصدر الدين ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', '2. p.202-p.403 : Asrār al-āyāt wa-anwār al-bayyināt / Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Shīrāzī.', '1. p.1-p.201 : Sharḥ Risālat al-Ḥikmah al-ʻarshīyah al-Ṣadrīyah / Muḥammad Ismāʻīl ibn al-Sumayʻ al-Iṣfahānī.', 'Careful copy of the commentary by Muḥammad Ismāʻīl ibn al-Sumayʻ al-Iṣfahānī (d.1860 or 61) on al-Ḥikmah al-ʻarshīyah, the popular work on knowledge of God and eschatology by Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī (d.1640), followed by Asrār al-āyāt, also by Mullā Ṣadrā.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 651', 'Origin: No formal colophon; paper would suggest 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former Shelfmark: From spine label and inscription on inner front cover, "IL 197" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Assembled from two odd covers, each cut down to fit this text block ; upper cover consisting of pasteboards faced in deep brown leather with edge repairs and spine in red leather, traces of what appear to be earlier edge repairs in tan leather ; upper doublure in quite dark brown leather ; lower cover in light red-brown leather with same repairs at edges and spine (both earlier tan leather and red leather) ; lower board lining in yellow laid paper ; composed Type III binding (without flap), mismatched assembly from two odd covers ; upper cover bears blind-tooled decorative pattern (out of center) formed from a series of s-shaped, cross, and rosette-like stamps, s-shaped stamps delineate a central mandorla and pendants, as well as fill the border, cross shaped stamps are used for corner pieces, rosette-like stamps form accents ; upper doublure bears scalloped mandorla (again, now off center) with floral vegetal pattern (without chi clouds, exhibiting horizontal symmetry - Déroche class. OSh) ; lower cover bears scalloped mandorla (out of center) with vegetal pattern (compare Déroche class. OSd 8 and OSd 6) ; much worn chevron endbands in red and green, sewing difficult to examine but appears to be in white thread, two sewing stations ; in fair to poor condition, with much abrasion, cracking and losses of leather (particularly lower cover) even exposing boards ; boards are severely delaminating ; some moisture damage ; cover still well-attached however.', 'Support: Several European laid papers ; first quire (left blank) and final quire (left blank) in European laid paper (likely machine laid), unburnished, with "GIOVANNI GHIGLIOTTI" and crest/scrollwork partially visible (likely early 19th century), chain lines running horizontally spaced roughly 27 mm. apart and laid lines spaced roughly 15 laid lines per cm. also in the horizontal, appearing to form a cross-hatch ; next laid paper (16th or 17th cent. European paper) shows roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines (horizontal) evenly spaced roughly 28 mm. apart, all fairly distinct and straight, some inclusions and undissolved fibers, scarcely burnished if at all ; another European laid paper with watermarks (see fol.149-150/p.298-300 appears to be coat of arms with cross and initials below "CSP"? "GSR"?) and countermarks ("PA"? see fol.10, 11, 21, 72, etc.) partially visible with chain lines running horizontally and spaced roughly 22 mm. apart, laid lines spaced 12-13 laid lines per cm. ; another European laid paper with chain lines spaced 30-32 mm. apart and laid lines roughly 10-11 laid lines per cm., "MA" countermark visible (see fol.51 and fol.90), as well as "M" (or "MA"?) with trefoil (fol.89), and "CA?" with trefoil (fol.66 and fol.96) ; some leather burn and ink/pigment burn to breakthrough where "green" appears.', 'Decoration: Textual dividers in the form of discs, three dots, etc. ; text rubricated with key words, section headings, textual dividers, etc. in red ; in a few sections a "green" ink is used rather than red.', 'Script: In three main hands ; hand changes back and forth several times as different sections of the text are supplied in different hands : hand [1] (p.17-50) hand [2] (p.51-52) hand [1] (p.53-60) hand [2] (p.61-82) hand [1] (p.83-108) hand [2] (p.109-141) hand [3] (p.142-166) hand [1] (p.167-192) hand [3] (p.193-308) ; hand [1] Naskh, neat Syrian (?) hand, sans serif, mainly open counters, kāf mashkūlah preferred, rounded with occasional swooping descenders, the lām alif al-warrāqīyah preferred ; hand [2] Naskh, small Syrian (?) hand, virtually serifless, quite rounded, mainly closed counters ; hand [3] Naskh, bold Syrian (?) hand, mainly serifless, though occasional right-sloping head serifs on lām and free standing alif (or alif of lām alif ligature), strong vertical character, mix of open and closed counters, effect of slight variation in line thickness between horizontal and vertical strokes in a few instances ; section headings appear in a fine tawqīʻ, occasionally highly ligatured (see fol.85b-88b/p.170-176).', 'Layout: Written in 19 to 21 lines per page ; mainly single column, often divided to two columns or a narrower central column to set off verses of poetry ; frame-ruled with impression of ruling board clearly evident.', 'Collation: IV (8), V-2 (16), I (18), III (24), II (28), 2 (30), V (40), I+1 (43), V+1 (54), 2 V(74), V-1 (96), II (87), V-1 (96), V+2 (108), III (114), 4 V(154), II (158) ; mainly an assortment of odd (anomalous) quinions ; appears to have been assembled from several ms. copies ; in several instances the catchwords do not match but "missing text" often appears elsewhere in the ms. ; first and last quire blank and apparently added later, perhaps for supplying missing text at head and tail ; middle of the quire marks in the form of strokes in black ink in upper outer corner of right-hand leaf ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil Western numerals supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "وقال عتيق بن محمد الوراق التميمي المغربي كلما ذنب ابدي وجهه حجة فهو ملي بالحجج كيف لا يفرط في اجرامه من متى من شاء من الذنب خرج وقال احمد بن ابي فنن"', 'Incipit: "بالحاكم العدل اضحى الدين معتليا نجل العلا وسليل السادة الصلحا ما زلزلت مصر من كيد يراد بها وانما رقصت من عدله فرحا"', 'Title from inscription on fol.1a (p.1).', 'Ms. composite codex.', "Odd copy of al-Ṣafadī's commentary on Ibn Zaydūn's famous epistle, al-Risālah al-Jiddīyah. Acephalous and incomplete with an arrangement inconsistent with that of published editions. Begins just before the 15th قول of the epistle (see p.67 of the 1969 Cairo ed.). Appears to have been assembled from roughly three manuscript copies."])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Three crescents. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Text rubricated; marginal corrections and finding aids in hand of copyist; vol. has edge title.', "Date from owner's mark on p. [1].", '"Commentary on the Hidāyat al-sāʾil ilā \'l-ʻamal bi \'l-rubʻ al-kāmil of Sibṭ al-Māridīnī." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.'])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated; marginal corrections in hand of copyist.', "Date from owner's mark on p. [3].", "Commentary on Sibṭ al-Māridīnī's treatise on the sine quadrant, for which see Mich. Isl. Ms. 749,2; copy defective after p. [84]."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 624', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.132b, copy finished late Shawwāl 1020 [December 1611].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label, "IL 200" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in a textured dull blue cloth ; Type II (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves of a rough, non-laid, light brown paper ; in very good condition.', 'Support: European laid paper with single chain lines running horizontally spaced 27-28 mm. apart, roughly 7 per leaf and 12-13 laid lines per cm. ; watermark of crossbow inside a circle, probably Italian (compare the Mantua, 1525 mark in Wasserzeichensammlung Piccard, Nr. 123862).', 'Decoration: Includes two figures outlining where in the mouth sounds are produced (vocal tract diagrams) ; one of which (at p.161-162) is from a different work and has been sewn in with a single stitch ; the other is at page 163 ; although both diagrams portray the same subject, they are far from identical ; the diagram native to the codex is highly schematic, with the mouth, tongue, and lips all drawn as polygons ; the various parts of the mouth are labeled and the location where the sound of each letter is made is marked ; the inserted diagram is somewhat more crudely drawn, and the shape of the mouth is presented somewhat more organically, drawn as an oval with a curving object that presumably denotes the tongue ; in addition to labeling the parts of the mouth and where the sounds of the letters are made, this diagram also denotes the type of each tooth (molar, incisor, etc.) ; some variations in terminology, such as where ابتداء الحلق is marked (description provided by N. Gardiner) ; text rubricated with "قال" and "اقول" in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; Persian or Turkish hand ; sans serif ; sometimes rather sharply sloping down to the baseline ; the lām alif al-mukhaffafah and al-warrāqīyah are both used, as are closed counters for all of the maḥājir letters, a nūn with the dot incorporated, and the Persianate final kāf.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, VI-2 (10), 12 V (130), II-1 (133), ii ; chiefly quinions ; final four leaves blank and unmarked without missing text ; catchwords lacking ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت تمام بعون الله الملك المنان تحرير في اوائل شهر شوال المبارك سنة عشرين والف".', 'Explicit: "وحكم العين في الكلمة التي لم تجتمع فيها الاعلال ايضا كحكم عين طوي في عدم الاعلال للمتابعة نحو طويا فانه لو اعل عين طويا لم يجتمع الاعلاء لان الا انه لم يعل تبعا لطوي"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله المتقدس عن الادغام والاعلال المتنزه عن النقل من حال الى حال والصلاة على محمد الصحيح الاقوال وعلى مقرونه من الصحابة والآل وبعد فيقول العبد سروري بن شعبان غفر الله لهما ولجميع اهل الايمان لما كان علم الصرف بعد اللغة مما لا بدلنا..."', 'Title from inscription on interior of upper cover.', 'Ms. codex.', 'A commentary on Marāḥ al-arwāḥ, a celebrated textbook of Arabic grammar by Aḥmad ibn ‘Alī ibn Mas‘ud. Description provided by Noah Gardiner.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 107', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.123, transcription completed Dhū al-Qaʻadah 1150 [Feb-Mar 1738].', 'Accompanying materials: Cut out of a masjid inserted between pp.66-67.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 73. Talim al-mutaallim."', 'Binding: Pasteboards (semi-limp) covered in laid paper with dark brown leather at spine, fore-edge flap and edges/turn-ins ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in indigo laid paper ; sewn in cream thread, two stations, often broken, all quires quite loose ; in very poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, cover detaching at spine, etc. ; repairs in wove paper ; housed in envelope.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; one type with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 30-33 mm. apart (horizontal), three crescent (tre lune) watermark (compare Heawood 869-870), thick and burnished though not very smooth ; another type much thinner and only lightly burnished, with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 20-23 mm. apart (horizontal), crown above band with "I P" above grapes watermark ; soiled, stained and dog-eared.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated ; occasional overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Turkish hand ; mainly sans serif, but occasional head serifs appear on lām of definite article ; strong horizontal character, adhering to baseline ; slight contrast in thickness between horizontal and vertical strokes ; many descenders flattened (mabsūṭah) ; many closed counters ; point of final nūn usually assimilated with bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: V (10), IV (18), 2 V(38), V-2 (46), V (56), III (62) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "وتمامه في شهر ذي القعدة الشريفة على يد اضعف العباد غفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه وتاريخ السنة خمسين ومائة والف سنة ۱۱٥٠"', 'Explicit: "فاين تجد ذلك الكتاب فأجاب بقوله يجده من يطلبه هو كتاب مشهور ومعتبر بين العلماء فلا بد لطالب العلم من ان يجده ويتبرك بالاثار والخبار المذكورة فيه . الحمد لله على التمام والصلوة والسلام على محمد خير افضل الرسل الكرام ..."', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي انعم علينا بانواع النعم ولطائف الاحسان ... وبعد فلما رأيت الكتاب المسمى بتعليم المتعلم ... اردت ان اشرحه شرحا ..."', 'Title from inscription above opening (p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Ibn Ismāʻīl's commentary on al-Zarnūjī's treatise on proper behavior for successful study, manner of instruction, attitudes to the material, and the teacher-student relationship."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 144', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.126, copied by Muḥammad ibn ʻUthmān (Mehmet Ösman) in the school of Ali Efendi, Trabzon. Transcription finished 25 Ramaḍān 1104 [ca. 30 May 1693].', 'Accompanying materials: Insert carrying glosses (paginated pp.87-88).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 110. Ardabili\'s commentary on the Unmudaj." ; "٥٩٣" on tail of textblock.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; upper and lower covers bear gold-stamped mandorla with orange onlays and gold-painted accents, accompanied by a border of gold fillets ; sewn in pink thread, two stations ; traces of worked endbands remain ; overall in fair to poor condition with some abrasion, lifting of leather, delamination of boards, etc. ; housed in envelope.', 'Support: European laid paper, mainly with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal) ; watermark with three bars in scrollwork ; crisp but sturdy, well-sized and burnished, dark cream in color with some inclusions ; a second type of European laid paper appears toward the end of the codex (name watermark, difficult to examine) ; flyleaves in still a different type (watermark with name in bar) ; some smudging and staining.', 'Decoration: Keywords and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: mainly Naskh ; fine Turkish hand ; only partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs appearing on bar of kāf (shaqq) and irregularly on joined alif, initial alif lām, etc. ; mainly closed counters ; very slight effect of words descending to baseline ; rounded and freely ligatured though rightward descenders mainly tapered ; alif maqṣūrah regularly mardūdah ; replacement leaf (p.17-18) in a naskh with strong influence of nastaʻlīq.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 5 V(50), IV+1 (59), II (63) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and insert ; skips two pages between pp.43-44).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب ... على يد اضعف الخلائق المحتاج الى رحمة الله تعالى محمد ابن عثمان ... في اليوم خمس وعشرين من شهر رمضان المبارك في يوم ... السبت وقت العصر في شهر طربزون في مدرسة على افندى سنه اربع ومائة والف تم"', 'Explicit: "وعصمنا الله من شرورهم و ... لحوارهم والله اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب "', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله [الذي] جعل العربية مفتاح البيان وصيرها آلة بها تحترز [؟] عن الخطأ ... وبعد يقول الفقير المولى ... جمال الله والدين محمد ابن عبد الغني الاردبيلي غفر الله له لما رأيت مختصر الامام الهمام ... جار الله ... انموذجه في النحو قليل اللفظ كثير المعنى صغير الحجم ... ولم يكن له شرح يفيد طالبه ويلقي اليه مقاصده ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.11).", 'Ms. codex.', '3. p.130-p.133 : [Qaṣīdat yaqūlu al-ʻabd fī Badʼ al-Amālī] / ʻAlī ibn ʻUthmān al-Farghānī.', '2. p.127-129 : [blank].', '1. p.12-126 : Sharḥ Unmūdhaj Maḥmūd al-Zamakhsharī / al-Ardabīlī.', "Fine copy of al-Ardabīlī's commentary of the Unmūdhaj fī al-naḥw, a treatise on Arabic grammar by Maḥmūd ibn ʻUmar al-Zamakhsharī (d.1144). Followed by the renowned theological poem of al-Ūshī (12th cent.), Badʼ al-Amālī (or Qaṣīdat yaqūlu al-ʻabd fī Badʼ al-Amālī) in a different hand."])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Two crescents; three crescents with star.', 'Contains tables.', 'Text rubricated; marginal notes and corrections in hand of copyist and others; on p. [1], fāydah fī maʻrifat awj al-kawākib al-sabʻah[?] ʻalá raṣad Ulūgh Bik.', "End date based on earliest dated owner's mark on p. [1].", '"Also called Manẓūma al-ḥāsibīya fī \'l-ḳadāyā al-nujūmīya." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.', 'Commentary on the Urjūzat al-qawāʻid fī al-qaḍāyā al-nujūmīyah, a poem on astrology by ʻAlī ibn Abī al-Rijāl al-Shaybānī. The commentary is not the same as that in Mich. Isl. Ms. 819,1.'])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated, with overlinings in red; marginal corrections in hand of copyist (same as that of Mich. Isl. Ms. 800,2).', 'Pp. [1-26]. Bound with: Badr al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad Sibṭ al-Māridīnī, Ḥāwī al-mukhtaṣarāt fī al-ʻamal bi-rubʻ al-muqanṭarāt, pp. [27-74].', 'Commentary on the Risālah fī al-ʻamal bi-al-rubʻ al-mawsūm bi-al-muqanṭarāt by Shihāb al-Dīn Abū al-ʻAbbās Aḥmad ibn Rajab al-Qāhirī ibn al-Majdī. See David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), pp. 73 and 119.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1016', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.294, copied by Karīm al-Ḥusaynī ( كريم الحسيني ). Date of transcription not specified, though author, paper, etc. would suggest latter 19th century and date in oval seal impression may provide a very rough terminus ante quem of 1893 (or even 1884).', 'Accompanying materials: Blank scrap paginated pp.301-302.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 165', 'Binding: Boards covered in green on cream block-printed paper in a reptile (alligator) design with light-brown to gray cloth over spine and board corners (half binding) ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in untinted paper ; blank paper label on spine ; sewn in blue-green thread, two stations ; overall in fairly good condition with split forming at lower hinge.', 'Support: Wove paper, cream in color with occasional octagonal embossed mark with almond-shaped central cartouche carrying "фабрики | No 5 | Сергьева" (see p.157, 183, 225, 233, 241, 269, 271 and compare no.19 with dates of use 1874, 1876, 1884, 1886 in Виталий Крижановский, Штемпеля на бумаге канцелярии Елисаветградской городской думы (1870–1916 гг.) как исторический источник) and another octagonal embossed mark with circular cartouched carrying "No 5" (see p.195, 199, 202, 207).', 'Script: Naskh ; spacious, elegant Persianate hand ; seriffed with left-sloping head-serifs on most ascenders (even free-standing alif), fairly vertical (without inclination to the left or right), occasional superscripting of letters and words, many sweeping descenders (final nūn, yāʼ, etc.), final yāʼ unpointed, pointing (two and three dots) in strokes or conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Written in 16 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 18 IV(144), I (146), iii ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present (though occasionally cut off) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and blank scrap).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "كتبه كريم الحسينى از خواندن التماس دعا دارم"', 'Explicit: "يجب المحسنين وبالاحسان نختتم الكلام في هذا المقام ... هذا اخر ما اوردنا ايراده في الشرح والتوضيح مع الاشارة الى بعض النكاة الخالية عنها كتب النجاة بالرمز ... ان الله لا يضيع عمل عامل فنعم اجر العالمين ولمثل هذا فليتنافس المتنافسون فان لله وان اليه راجعون والحمد لله رب العالمين ..."', 'Incipit: "نحمدك يا من يرفع اليه يصعد الكلم والطيب والعمل الصالح يرفعه ... اما بعد يقول العبد الجاني نظر علي ابن محسن الجيلاني ... اني قد كتبت في اوان الصبي شرقا [شرحا ؟] على العوامل المفاضل ... مولانا محسن ... يليق بالصبيان وان كان محتوما على بعض ما استفديتها من كتب الاعلام', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the commentary by Naẓar ʻAlī ibn Muḥsin al-Jīlānī (fl. 19th cent.?) upon the grammatical treatise by Muḥsin ibn Muḥammad Ṭāhir al-Qazwīnī al-Naḥwī (fl. 1715), in GAL also attributed to Muḥammad ibn Murtaḍá Mullā Muḥsin Fayḍ-i Kāshānī (Kashānī).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 344', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.172, copied by Ḥusayn ibn Shams al-Ḥusaynī al-Jurjānī with transcription completed in haste ("ʻalá sabīl al-istiʻjāl...") Rabīʻ II 868 [November-December 1463].', 'Former shelfmark: "447 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in brown leather with gold-painted central ornament (four-petalled flower), rule-border and accents, as well as border in blind rules ; upper and lower covers carry central blind-tooled scalloped mandorla having fleurons in the manner of a three-sepaled calyx at the upper and lower extremities and filled with interlace pattern (compare Weisweiler W 89-95) all defined in a simple gold-painted rule, as well as tooled border in a series of rules and s-shaped stamps ; sewn in light blue thread, two stations ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion and staining, lifting of leather, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, faint, somewhat indistinct) and grouped chain lines faintly visible (likely in pairs), sturdy and well-burnished, dark cream in color.', 'Decoration: Headings chrysographed.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; exquisite hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 11-12 lines per page, mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: III (6), III+1 (13), III (19), II (23), IV (31), I (33), III (39), 3 IV(63), III (69), VIII+1 (86), I (88) ; miscellany of ternions, quaternions, etc. ; catchwords occasionally present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, in Arabic, reads "وقد وقع الفراغ من هذه الديوان على سبيل الاستعجال بيد اضعف عباد الله الغنى حسين بن شمس الحسينى الجرجانى تجاوز الله عن سيائه وذلك فى شهر ربيع الثانى لسنه ثمان وستين وثمانمائة هجرية"', 'Explicit: "چون تو بر اسرار دیماهی [؟] علیم ختم شد استغفر الله العظیم"', 'Incipit: [Dīvān-i Fattāḥī] "شراب عشق صافی گشت در خمخانه دلها الا یا ایها الساقی ادر کاسا و ناولها ..." ; [Muntakhab-i Shabistān-i khayāl] "بعد از لوازم توبه واستغفار ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', '6. p.156-p.176 : [further verses opening "بنام آهنگ از خمهای افلاک شراب فیض فطرت ریخت بر خاک " and likely comprising Dīvān-i Khumārī mentioned on the title page].', '5. p.153-p.155 : [blank].', '4. p.65-p.152 : [further poems, likely comprising the Dīvān-i asrār mentioned on the title page].', '3. p.58-p.65 : [Muntakhab-i Shabistān-i khayāl] / Ḥakīm al-Dīn al-Asrārī.', '2. p.54-p.57 : [blank].', '1. p.2-p.53 : [Dīvān-i Fattāḥī] / Muḥammad Yaḥyá ibn Sībak.', 'Elegant copy of the Dīvān of Muḥammad Yaḥyá ibn Sībak (d. 1448 or 9), known mainly as Fattāḥī, as well as Tuffāḥī, Asrārī or Khumārī, accompanied by other excerpts.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 684', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.629, copied by Abū al-Qāsim ibn Āghā Jān bin Baz [?] with transcription completed 14 Rajab [?] 1063 [ca. 10 June 1653]. As appears in preceding authorial colophon (also on p.629), composition completed in Ṣafar 890 [1485].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- c. Portion of a printed page with list of titles in Arabic script, perhaps torn from a catalogue -- d. Slip ruled with a red grid (between pp.112-113).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label, "IL 22" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black (upper cover, which appears to be a replacement for the original) and brown (lower cover and spine) leathers ; Type II (with flap, though now lost) ; upper board lining in untinted wove paper ; lower doublure in red-brown leather ; lower cover carries blind-stamped (with recessed onlay) scalloped mandorla (filled with scene of two antelopes and a flowering tree) and pendants, as well as tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps flanked by tooled fillets ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in light yellow and pink, only portion of tailband remains ; overall in quite poor condition with flap lost, extensive abrasion, lifting and losses of leather (especially to replacement upper cover), staining, severe moisture damage and shrinkage in upper cover, fills to upper cover in bits of black leather and pink textile, etc.', "Support: European laid paper ; mainly with 13 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 24-27 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of crown above fleur de lis (see p.25, etc.), extremely well sized and burnished (quite glossy), transluscent and quite crisp, though sturdy ; another type with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 23 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of an inverted teardrop shape with cross (see p.452, etc.) ; burnisher's marks visible.", "Decoration: Keywords (فتح، ميقرمايد، الخ), headings for excerpts from the dīwān attributed to ʻAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib, and abbreviation symbols (sigla, etc.) rubricated ; most Arabic excerpts overlined in red ; textual dividers in the form of 'three inverted commas' conjoined to form a single stroke ; a few diagrams in red and black ink (see pp.49-51, 67, 112).", 'Script: Nastaʻlīq and naskh ; elegant Persianate hand ; nastaʻlīq sans serif with slight effect of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, sweeping horizontal strokes, pointing in strokes or conjoined dots ; Arabic excerpts mainly in a medium naskh, serifless and fairly vertical but with slight effect of tilt to the left, quite rounded with curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page, occasionally divided to two columns to set off poetry ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: IV+1 (9), 37 IV(305), V (315) ; almost exclusively quaternions ; quires marked in black ink ("رب يسر") at the head of the recto of the opening leaf of each quire ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تمت الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب بتاريخ ۱۴ شهر رجب المرجب سنه ۱۰۶۳ م م م المحتاج الى رحمة الله الغني ابو القاسم بن آغا جان بن بز"', 'Explicit: "ارجو النجا بكم يوم المعادون حبت نداى من الذنب الافانينا"', 'Incipit: "اهل فقر همت طلبیم آینه ذات حق چو درویشانند ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '2. p.153-p.629 : [continuation of Sharḥ-i Dīvān-i mansūb bih Amīr al-Muʼminīn ʻAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib] / Qāḍī Mīr Ḥusayn ibn Muʻīn al-Dīn al-Maybudī.', '1. p.1-p.153 : Favātiḥ-i sabʻah / Qāḍī Mīr Ḥusayn ibn Muʻīn al-Dīn al-Maybudī.', 'Elegant but acephalous copy (opening in the first Fātiḥah, compare p.18 of the 2000 Tihrān edition) of the commentary by Qāḍī Mīr Ḥusayn ibn Muʻīn al-Dīn al-Manṭiqī al-Maybudī al-Yazdī (d.1504?) upon the dīwān attributed to ʻAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib (ca. 600-661), opening with the Favātiḥ-i sabʻah.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 260', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; decoration, paper, etc. may suggest 16th century ; authorial colophon on p.418 indicates date of composition Ṣafar 890 [February-March 1485].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with notes (paginated pp.17-18) -- b. Blank slip (paginated pp.53-54) -- c. Slip with notes (paginated pp.99-100).', 'Former shelfmark: "١٢٦" possible former inventory mark on recto of front flyleaf ; "331 T. D. M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark maroon leather with black leather over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins (likely repairs) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in dark brown leather with central gold-painted four-lobed floral motif ; fore edge flap lined in green silk ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold-painted scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal decoration, compare Déroche OAi 6), pendants, and corner pieces, along with gold-painted border ; sewn in dark green-blue thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in brown and cream (head) and dark green and cream (tail), fair condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (Persian) laid paper mainly with 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and no chain lines clearly visible, well-burnished to glossy, sturdy, transluscent, medium to dark cream in color ; toward close another crisp type with many inclusions (see p.387 to close) ; flyleaves in European laid paper (surface-dyed lavender and gold-flecked) ; added leaves at opening on European laid paper with watermarks of eagle, "GFA" and lion rampant in arms (see pp.1-4) ; staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) appears at opening on p.6, consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying the basmalah in white, overlaid with arabesque in green, surrounded by further vegetal decoration in gold, pink, blue, yellow, green, etc. on a field of lapis lazuli, and surounded by decorative band with blue crosses on a field of white and band of interlace in gold ; surmounted by another narrow rectangular piece containing similar vegetal design evoking arabesque on a field of lapis lazuli and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; keywords, abbreviation symbols, and text being commented upon in rubricated (light and dark red) ; textual dividers in the form inverted commas, letter hāʼ, etc. in red ; written area throughout surrounded by frame consisting of gold band flanked by black fillets with outermost blue rule (frame on incipit and facing page includes additional gold band) ; occasional diagrams in red and black (see p.20, 57, 87).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq and naskh ; text of sharḥ in nastaʻlīq, excerpts of Arabic poetry being commented upon in naskh ; nastaʻlīq compact with slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, letterforms characteristic of nastaʻlīq ; Persianate naskh mainly serifless, quite vertical and somewhat stiff though descenders are mainly curvilinear, with pointing in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, I (2), *IV (9), 24 IV(201), IV+1 (210), i ; almost exclusively quaternions ; first two leaves of opening quaternion affixed to each other ; added leaves at opening of codex ruled for table of contents but left blank ; on pp.43-44 area within written area left blank (perhaps for diagrams or illustrations never realized) ; catchwords present ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and added leaves and skips two pages each between pp.239-240, 237-238, and 267-268).', 'Explicit: "مهما ترى صف عقد من مديحهم في نظمه ود زهر الحق تضمينا"', 'Incipit: "سپاس وسعادة اساس وشكر عبادة لباس معبودى را كه اعلام نبوة وولاية در ميدان فتوة وهداية ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.5).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the commentary by Qāḍī Mīr Ḥusayn ibn Muʻīn al-Dīn al-Maybūdī al-Yazdī (d.1504?) on the collection (dīwān) of Arabic poetry attributed to ʻAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib (ca. 600-661), opening with the Favātiḥ-i sabʻah.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 263', 'Origin: As appears at close of Risālahʼ-i Sharḥ-i ḥadīs̲, transcription completed [?] 901 [1495 or 6]. Paper, etc. certainly suggest 15th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "438 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf (p.1).', 'Binding: Heavy pasteboards covered in painted lacquerwork, spine in black leather ; Type III binding (without flap, two-piece binding, overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; doublures in fine painted lacquerwork with paintings of a tall narcissus-like plant with leaves in shades of green and flowers and buds in yellow with pink accents at the head of a central stalk, all on a red ground with border in black with gold accents (composition of upper doublure mirrors that of lower doublure) ; upper and lower covers bear paintings of nearly identical floral composition in mirror image to one another on a deep golden-orange or bronze-colored background, namely a central cluster of peonies, poppies, tulips, pansies, etc. with additional buds and floral forms filling the main panel all in shades of pink, light blue, lavender, and white with leaves in various shades of green, and surrounded by decorative band of floral vegetal motifs on a dark red-bronze ground framed in black borders with gold accents ; sewn in dark turquoise thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in dark turquoise and red, good condition (protected by leather extending from spine) ; overall in fairly good condition with only minor abrasion and losses to lacquer, etc. ; textblock has certainly been trimmed (some leaves folded to retain marginalia) ; now housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and rare single chain lines visible, sturdy, well-sized and burnished, inclusions ; staining and tide-lines ; added leaves at opening and close in European laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-29 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of star (p.2) and crescent (p.4) visible.', 'Decoration: Keywords, some notabilia, etc. rubricated ; overlining in red ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant hand ; serifless, with marked effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: II+1 (5), 16 IV(133), IV+1 (142), II (146), 2 IV(162), I (164), i ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes added leaves carrying excerpts at opening and close of codex).', 'Incipit: [Sharḥ-i Lamaʻāt] "لو لا لمعات برق نور القديم من نحو حمى جود وحى الحريم ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "9. p.322-p.328 : [assorted excerpts (from Jāmī's Lavāʼiḥ, etc.) and former owners' marks, otherwise blank].", '8. p.318-323: Risālahʼ-i Sharḥ-i ḥadīs̲ [?].', '7. p.310-p.318 : [brief treatise opening with verses of Abū Saʻīd ibn Abī al-Khayr (d.1049)"سر رشتهء دولت ای برادر بکف آر وین عمر گرامی بخسارت مگذار"].', '6. p.307-p.309 [assorted excerpts].', '5. p.294-p.306 : [excerpts from glosses on the Mas̲navī of Rūmī].', '4. p.292-p.293 : [assorted excerpts, otherwise blank].', '3. p.14-p.291: Sharḥ-i Lamaʻāt / Jāmī.', '2. p.13 : [contents listing for entire volume].', "1. p.6-p.12 : [assorted excerpts (from Jāmī's Lavāʼiḥ, etc.) and notes].", "Fine collection (majmūʻah) of several works including Jāmī's commentary on the Lamaʻāt of Fakhr al-Dīn Ibrāhīm al-ʻIrāqī (d.1289), glosses on the Mas̲navī of Rūmī, and other excerpts."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 434', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. may suggest 16th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "383 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on interior of upper cover ; "232" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\'.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (kumlu or kılçıklı ebru in blue, green, yellow and white) with red leather over spine ; Type III (without flap) ; board linings in European laid paper (three hats watermark) ; resewn in white thread ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat indistinct) and no chain lines plainly visible, cloudy formation, fairly thick and sturdy, quite well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Superb illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān/sarlawḥ) at opening consisting of rectangular piece with cartouche carrying the basmalah in white on a field of lapis lazuli overlaid with a swirling vegetal pattern in gold, surrounded by a delicate vegetal pattern in black with chi clouds in light blue on a field of gold, with entire piece bordered in green or turquoise band ; rectangular piece surmounted by scalloped three semi-circular pieces (domes) filled with a similar delicate vegetal pattern in gold on fields of lapis lazuli, with further gold accents and chi clouds in light blue, all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) ; written area very delicately gold-flecked and surrounded by heavy gold band ; keywords and text of ḥadīth and Qurʼānic excerpts, etc. chrysographed.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; exquisite hand ; serifless with characteristic descent of words to baseline and superscripting of final words and letters ; elongation of horizontal strokes ; exaggerated contrast between thickness of horizontal and vertical strokes; text of keywords, text of Qurʼānic excerpts, quoted ḥadīth, etc. in tawqīʻ with tilt to the left and right-sloping head-serif.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, III+2 (8), i ; catchwords present.', 'Explicit: "و او از معنی این رباعی حالت رجوع بآن جناب فهم کند البته اورا سروری بیدا شود زیرا که خاصیت محبت آنست که محب را هیج لذتی بهتر از ملاقات محبوب نباشد تمت الرسالة"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله فیاض الحکم والمواهب وموصل الطالبین الی المطالب ... اما بعد بدانکه این فقیر را بسی شغف مى بود بدانستن رباعی قطب الاولیا سلطان ابی سعید ابی الخیر قدس الله روحه ورباعی اینست حورا بناظره نگارم صف زد رضوان ز تعجب کف خود بر کف زد..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of a commentary by the Naqshbandī shaykh Aḥrār (d.1490) on the quatrain (rubāʻī) known as the Ḥawrāʼīyah attributed to the famous mystic Abū Saʻīd ibn Abī al-Khayr (d.1049).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 827', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.558, transcription of the bulk of the manuscript (from p.185 to close excluding replacement leaves) completed in Tabrīz, 1 Ṣafar 886 [ca. 1 April 1481]. Opening of the manuscript (through p.184) appears to have been copied separately, though likely around the same time (i.e. late 15th or early 16th century).', 'Accompanying materials: Several inserts carrying diagrams and glosses, also paginated (see pp.131-2, 209-10, 251-2, 253-4, 255-6, 263-4, 503-4, 505-6, 525-26).', 'Former shelfmark: "٤٢٧" from label on upper cover.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in brown leather ; upper and lower covers carry blind-tooled rule-border ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in dark blue and cream, quite good condition ; overall in somewhat poor condition with staining, lifting and losses of leather at flap, etc. ; repair to fore edge flap in floral-printed textile.', 'Support: non-European laid paper of at least three types ; opening through p.184 on type with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, typically quite diffuse), chains lines only sporadically visible, well-sized and burnished to glossy ; bulk of manuscript in a similar type with 7 laid lines per cm. (again quite diffuse), chain lines visible as short lengths or occasional pairs (spaced 13 mm. apart, see p.220), darker in color, well-sized and burnished to glossy ; some replacements on still a different type (see bifolia carrying pp.283-70, 295-302, 343-48) ; other replacements, added leaves carrying table of contents at opening, and many inserts on European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; overlining in red ; numerous tables and line diagrams in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) and naskh ; at least three elegant hands ; text of replacement leaves in naskh.', 'Layout: Written in 17, 16 and 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: I (2), IV+1 (11), 8 V(91), II (95), 4 IV(127), III (133), IV-4+4 (141), II (145), V (155), IV (163), III (169), 2 IV(185), III (191), 8 IV(255), IV+2 (265), III (271) ; main section mainly quaternions ; opening section chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Hindu-Arabic numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and skips two pages between pp.345-6).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "قد وقع الفراغ من تحرير هذه الرساله فى دار السلطنه تبريز فى غره صفر سنه ۸۸۶"', 'Explicit: "بل وحى و الهام و كيفيت وضع جداويل تر طاهر ست والله اعلم بحقايق الاشيار والحمد لوليه والشكر على نعمائه والصلوه والسلام على نبيه محمد واله وصحبه وعترته اجمعين"', 'Incipit: "متن مقالت اول در معرفت تواريخ وان مشتمل است بر مقدمه وهفت باب مقدمه در معرفت معنى تاريخ وسال وماه واجزاء آن جون از سمه اجرام سماوى ظاهر تر افتاب وماهست ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.5).", 'Ms. composite codex.', 'Fine, early composite copy of the commentary by the astronomer and mathematician ʻAlāʼ al-Dīn ʻAlī al-Qushjī [Ali Kuşcu] (d.1474) on the Zīj-i Gurkānī, the astronomical handbook compiled at Samarqand under the amīr Ulugh Beg (d.1449), also its principal author. Ali Kuşcu himself took part in the compilation of the Zīj as director of the observatory. Table of contents at opening (pp.2-4).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 470', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper and hand may suggest 16th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. (pp.1-2)-- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 169" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (in shades of pink and blue) with red leather over spine, fore edge flap and fore edge of upper board ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in European laid paper ; sewn in grey thread, two stations ; overall in good condition with only minor abrasion, lifting and losses of leather.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with roughly 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines grouped in threes (horizontal) with roughly 8-11 mm. between chains and 36-39 mm. between groups ; well-burnished and quite smooth ; firm and fairly crisp.', 'Decoration: Section headings, keywords, and abbreviations (abbreviation symbols) rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Turkish hand ; mainly sans serif though left sloping head-serif appears occasionally on alif of lām-alif ligature ; effect of tilt to the left ; many open counters ; pointing in distinct dots, with two dots occasionally oriented vertically ; fully vocalized ; section headings in larger curvilinear script approaching thuluth.', 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 6 V (60) ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords inconsistently present ; quire signatures (numbering) in the form of full words in the top left corner of the recto of the first leaf of each quite ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Explicit: "واخر دعوانا بتوفيق ربنا ان الحمد لله الذي وحده علا وبعد صلاة الله ثم سلامه على سيد الخلق الرضي متنخلا محمد المختار للمجد كعبة صلوة تباري الريح مسكا ومندلا وتبدي على اصحابه نفحاتها بغير ثناه زرنبا وقرنفلا كملت بحمد الله وعونه وحسن تأييده وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد و اله وسلم تسليما"', 'Incipit: "قال الشيخ الاجل الامام المقرئ ابو القاسم بن فيره بن خلف بن احمد الرعيني ثم الشاطبي رضي الله وارضاه بدأت ببسم الله في النظم اولا تبارك رحمانا رحيما وموئلا وثنيت صلى الله ربي على الرضى محمد المهدى الى الناس مرسلا"', "Title from inscriptions on interior of upper cover and 'title page' (p.7).", 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of al-Shāṭibī's versification (ṭawīl, in 1173 verses) of al-Dānī's compendium of the seven readings, al-Taysīr, intended as a didactic poem which eases the task of memorization via a clever mnemonic device in the form of carefully introduced sigla. A table with these sigla and abbreviation symbols appears on the recto of the opening leaf of the codex (p.5). Table of contents on 'title page' (p.7) would indicate that this work was once part of a collection of texts from which it has been since separated. Description provided by Maxim Romanov."])

en: (count: ['On p. [1], illuminated ʻunwān; text vocalized, rubricated in blue and gold inks, and enclosed in gold borders; illuminated colophon.', 'Date in Turkish colophon: 1269.', 'For another copy of this text see Mich. Isl. Ms. 210.', 'Text (not this copy) published.', "A biography of the Prophet, one of the author's best-known published works."])

en: (count: ['On p. [1], illuminated ʻunwān; text vocalized, rubricated, and enclosed in gold borders; edges gilded in foliate patterns; inside cover, invocation against bookworms: yā Kabīkaj, yā Shamʻalūn.', "Date and copyist's name in colophon: qad wafaqanī Allāh ... bi-taḥrīr dhālika al-kitāb wa-al-itmām fī awākhir Dhī al-Qaʻdah al-ḥarām li-sanat tisaʻ wa-thamānīn baʻd al-miʾatayn wa-al-alf [i.e. January 1873] ... wa-anā al-faqīr Abū al-Mukhtār Ibrāhīm Ṭāhir ibn Muṣṭafā al-Ḥanafī madhhaban al-Ashrafī ṭarīqatan wa-maslakan.", 'For another copy of this text see Mich. Isl. Ms. 209.', 'Text (not this copy) published.', "A biography of the Prophet, one of the author's best-known works."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 24', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.240b (p.480) transcription finished 1231 H [1815 or 1816 M]. No other details on copyist or place of transcription provided.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 11. Al-Shifa al-sharif."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in a blue-green tinted laid paper ; upper and lower covers bear large stamped and gold-painted scalloped mandorla with vegetal composition (compare Déroche class. OAi 6) and pendants ; sewn in rose-colored (pink) and yellow thread, two stations ; in fair condition with significant staining, some abrasion, repairs in a variety of red and black leathers, lifting and detaching of leather (especially edges/turn-ins), paper label affixed to lower cover, some spine slant (cocked), etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 13 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 31 mm. apart (horizontal) ; crisp and only lightly burnished ; watermarks include lion rampant in shield or scrollwork and "C E W" ; moisture damage, staining and smudging ; front flyleaf has partially adhered to upper board.', 'Decoration: Fine illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) on fol.1b (p.1) consisting of rectangular piece surmounted by semi-circular (dome) piece ; rectangular piece carries empty cartouche defined by flanking floral vegetal accents in blue and pink on fields of gold ; scalloped semi-circular piece is filled with floral vegetal pattern in blue, pink and gold on field of gold, outlined in red and blue, and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue with red and gold accents ; headpiece is set in a well of pink, red and gold bands ; written area of incipit and facing page bordered in frame consisting of a heavy gold band with narrower gold bands setting off text ; elsewhere written area (and margin) surrounded by red rule-border ; occasional textual dividers in the form of gold discs ; text rubricated with section headings, keywords, overlining, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman Turkish hand ; partially seriffed with right-sloping head serifs appearing regularly on lām ; effect of slight tilt to the left ; closed and open counters ; pointing in distinct dots ; free assimilation of certain letters including rāʼ with following letter, final hāʼ with preceding rāʼ or dāl, etc. ; partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 24 V(240), ii ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes back flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," semi-triangular, reads: "تمت الكتاب الشفاء الشريف سنة احدى وثلاثين ومائتين والف"', 'Explicit: "فهو الجواد الذي لا يخيب من امله ولا ينتصر من خذله ولا يرد دعوة القاصدين ولا يصلح عمل المفسدين وهو حسبنا ونعم الوكيل"', 'Incipit: "رب يسر ولا تعسر رب تمم بالخير قال الفقيه القاضي الامام ابو الفضل عياض بن موسى بن عياض اليحصبي رضي الله عنه الحمد لله المتفرد باسمه الاسمى المختص بالملك الاعز الاحمى الذي ليس دونه منتهى ولا وراءه مرمى ... اما بعد اشرق الله قلبي وقلبك بانوار اليقين ولطف لي ولك بما لطف به لاوليائه المتقين ..."', 'Title from colophon on fol.240b (p.480).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the treatise on devotional obligations towards the Prophet.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 982', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 131', 'Binding: Boards covered in black textured cloth ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a geometric pattern (resembling a scale pattern) in olive green or dull gold ; cover gold-stamped with "النفس وبقاؤها" ; sewn in white thread over two recessed cords ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Machine wove paper.', 'Decoration: Text executed entirely in pencil.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a thin line ; serifless and freely ligatured with effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 13 lines per page.', "Collation: i, II (4), 8 IV(68), i ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; pages between sections (which correspond to gatherings) left blank, some serving as 'title pages' (see pp.9, 25, 41, 57, 73, 89, 105, 121) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.", 'Explicit: "فلما كان نفسه الناطقة التي هي من عالم النور ... المعاني نازلة الى عالم الصور بعد جوازة عالم الافلاك المشتملة على النسب الشريفة العددية الايقاعية والنغمية التذ برؤية الانوار واستماع النفمات المترنمة هذا ملخص الجواب على وجه الاجاملي"', 'Incipit: "هذا سفر في النفس وبقؤها ومشتمل على فصول فصل النفس الانسانية كلمة نورية وذات روحانية وشعلة ملكوتية لا تموت بموت البدن ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of what appears to be a selection of excerpts from Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī’s (d.1641) al-Ḥikmah al-mutaʻālīyah fī al-asfār al-ʻaqlīyah al-arbaʻah or al-Asfār al-arbaʻah, on the soul.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1037', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at close of ghazalīyāt on p.241, transcription completed Rajab 1244 [January 1829]. Close of muqaṭṭaʻāt on p.257 also dated 1244 [1828 or 9].', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 186', 'Binding: Dark brown (to black) leather (limp binding, without boards) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; now stab sewn in white thread, five stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and pink, good condition ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion, losses of leather, minor pest damage, etc. ; repair to spine (rebacked) in brown leather.', 'Support: European laid paper, mainly a type (perhaps machine laid) with chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), "laid lines" in a mesh / cross-hatch pattern, and watermark of "NICCOLO BRUZZO" under scrollwork with tower and star (see p.6, 8, 12, 14, 251, etc.) ; another type with 10-11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27-28 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermark of "F. PAPINI" under arms or scrollwork (see p.2, 232, etc.) ; all transluscent, sturdy, quite well-sized and burnished.', 'Decoration: Headings and keywords rubricated.', 'Script: Shikastah (shikastah-nastaʻlīq / شكسته نستعليق ) ; elegant hand in a medium line ; serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, sweeping descenders and elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct or conjoined dots, final nūn occasionally recurved (reversed), yāʼ often uncurved, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, with written area divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: Composition difficult to examine, originally bifolia may now be split ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between pp.29-30).', 'Colophon: [ghazalīyāt] "تمت الغزليات بتاريخ شهر رجب المرجب من شهور سنه ١٢۴۴ م م م " ; [muqaṭṭaʻāt] "فى سنه ١٢۴۴ م م م"', 'Title from rubricated heading at opening on p.4.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the collected poems (mainly ghazalīyāt and muqaṭṭaʻāt) of one Harātī [?].'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 971', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 120', 'Binding: Boards covered in black textured cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; cover gold-stamped with "سفر في الربوبيات" ; sewn in white thread over two recessed cords ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Wove paper.', 'Decoration: Text executed entirely in pencil ; a few instances of overlining in red.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a thin line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 11-17 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 5 IV(40), 2 VIII(72), VI (84), i ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "فاذا عرفت العناية الربانية في نفسك وبدنك فانظر الى الارض التي هي مقر جسدك ... قال وجاء ربك والملك وقال نزل الملائكة والروح فيها وعند هذا ... [؟] تعالى حسن الختام بجاه نبيه الوحيد عليه السلام آمين آمين آمين"', 'Incipit: "مقدمة حقيقة الانسان حقيقة جمعية وحدتها كوحدة العالم وحدة تأليفية ذات مراتب كثيرة من التجرد والتجسم ..."', "Title from inscription on opening 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy of what appears to be an abridgment of the first fann of Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī's (d.1641) al-Mabdaʼ wa-al-maʻād (compare Isl. Mss. 979, 980 and 965)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 443', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.24a (p.47), composition finished in the first part of Rabīʻ al-Akhīr 1120 [June 1708]. Copied by al-Sayyid ʻAbd Allāh, that is the renowned Ottoman calligrapher, Seyyid Abdullah of Yedikule (Yedikuleli Seyyid Abdullah Efendi, d.1731), favorite pupil of the celebrated calligrapher Hafız Osman Efendi (d.1698). Signed by the mudhahhib / müzehhip (gilder) in the lower edge of the frame on fol.24a (p.47) in a miniscule hand "ذهبه عبدي شاكر؟ سليمان مذهب شهرياري", seemingly Şakir Süleyman müzehhip Şehriyari.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark green leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns, flyleaves (made endpapers) and interior of envelope flap in red surface-dyed paper ; upper and lower covers bear large central gold-stamped (recessed onlay) scalloped mandorla , pendants and corner pieces along with tooled and gold-painted rolled guilloché border with gold fillets ; vegetal design within the decorative elements has been accented with red paint and that of the mandorla evokes Déroche class. Nsd 7 ; design carries over to envelope flap ; chevron endbands in red and white have suffered some losses in good condition despite minor abrasion and edge wear though textblock has completely detached, some losses in spine lining and sewing.', 'Support: non-European (early 18th century Persianate?) laid paper with laid lines running horizontally spaced roughly 7-8 laid lines per cm. and some sagging, no chain lines, burnished to glossy, some undissolved fibers ; flyleaves of European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Superbly executed illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) on fol.1b (p.2) consists of rectangular piece with cartouche carrying the title of the work in white surmounted by a w-shaped piece with a network of tīgh and flowers above, all filled with floral design in blue, gold, green, pink, orange, and red ; exquisite illuminated headpiece on fol.3a (p.5) consists of a w-shaped piece with cartouche carrying the section heading and floral decoration in blue, gold, white, pink, green, orange and red surmounted by tīgh in blue with red accents ; illuminated headpiece on fol.4b (p.8) consists of a rectangular piece with cartouche carrying the section heading for the first hadith surmounted by a semicircular piece with tīgh above in blue and red accents all filled with floral decoration in blue, gold, green, white, pink, orange, and red ; textual dividers in the form of gold rosettes and floral vegetal motifs appear hear and there throughout ; ruled in a frame consisting of gold bands and black fillets ; text rubricated with some sections headings, key words, etc. in red ; main section headings in white. Signed by the illuminator in the lower edge of the frame at close (fol.24a / p.47) "ذهبه عبدي شاكر؟ سليمان مذهب شهرياري"', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Turkish hand ; slight tilt to the left ; seriffed with right sloping head-serif on lām of definite article, ṭāʼ, etc. but free-standing alif sans serif ; colophon more ligatured ; main section in headings tawqīʻ.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 2 V (20), II (24), i ; two quinions and a binion ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during cataloguing).', 'Colophon: "Authorial" and "Scribal," rectangular, reads "قد وقع الفراغ من تسويده بعون الله الملك المنان على يد مترجمه الفقير احمد بن عثمان المدرس باحدى المدارس الثمان في اوائل شهر ربيع الاخر لسنة عشرين ومائة والف كتبه الفقير الى رحمة ربه القدير الداعي بدوام الدولة العلية السيد عبد الله"', 'Dedication: Ahmet III (1673-1736), son of Mehmet IV at opening (fol.1b-2a) "السلطان احمد خان بن السلاطان محمد خان".', 'Explicit: "بو بنده كمينه ثنا معتاد لرى ميداذ سخنور يده تهمت خبط وخطا ايله تعيير اولنميه. بيت هركس مر هون بذل مقدور لنكانه دوئ خامه معذور. تاريخ ختام صحت اباد فيلسوف سخن اراى خرد فهم ايدوب ما حصل معنانى ديدى تاريخنى بو تاليفك صحت اباد شفاپيرانى"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله واصحابه اجمعين باحسان الى يوم الدين بعد هذا باعث جمع حديث اربعين ..."', 'Title from headpiece on fol.1b.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the commentary of Aḥmad Tāʼib ibn ʻUthmān, known as Osmanzade, on forty hadith.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 854', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.393, copied by Muḥammad Bakhsh ibn Muḥammad ʻAẓīm [likely the same copyist who executed Isl. Ms. 852 in 1238/1822] with transcription completed in Ṣafar 1256 [?] [April 1840 ?, corresponding to 1896 in Vikram Samvat as likely suggested earlier in colophon] in Bādpūr [?].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Photocopy of card with typed notes "17302 | 865 Amritsor, India | 1 Indian manuscript book | Original no. -- K241. Persian Poetry; 1896; green cloth slip cover. | Univ. of Mich., Div. of Fine Arts | Walter Koelz, 1932-33 | March 19, 1934" -- b. Scrap of ruled paper with notes in pencil "Persian Poetry | Date 1896 | Aminpur (place) | copy of Nizami\'s Iskandar-name" -- c. Card with typed notes and additions in pen "K241 | 17302 | Indian [crossed out] Mogul (?) manuscript book, green cloth slip cover | Persian script | Amritsar." -- d. Short piece of white cotton cord with label attached "17302/K241" -- e. Slip of paper (once folded) with notes and stamp (between pp.206-207).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 3', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in untinted laid paper with red-brown leather over spine and edges / turn-ins (paper faced, leather-edged, framed binding), now fitted with light blue (faded to green-blue) custom textile jacket or detachable overcover, stitched to form a sleeve into which each covered board slips (see p.246-247, 453 in Julia Miller, Books will speak plain) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper (some recycled) ; sewn in black and white thread (black and white threads twisted together), two stations ; heavy, worked chevron endbands in blue and cream, good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with some staining, abrasion, minor losses of cloth, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Indian) laid paper with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, somewhat indistinct, curving) and no chain lines clearly visible, quite cloudy formation, sturdy though thin and transluscent, light brown in color, burnished.', 'Decoration: Headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.4 consisting of rectangular piece (carrying the basmalah in black ink) set between decorative bands and surmounted by dome with vegetal design, mainly in red ; section headings rubricated ; some overlining in red ; written area surrounded by red double rule-border, divisions within also defined by red rules.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant Indian hand ; serifless with inclination to the right and slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and somewhat exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, mainly closed counters, yāʼ always pointed.', 'Layout: Written in 18 lines per page, with written area divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', "Collation: 24 IV (192), III (198) ; almost exclusively quaternions (followed by a ternion) ; opening and final leaf affixed to endpaper and trimmed ; middle of the quire marks in the form of oblique black strokes in the upper outer corner of the right-hand leaf and the lower outer corner of the left-hand leaf (from p.72-73, perhaps prior to that lost to trimming) ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (includes partial 'flyleaves' / free hinges).", 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تمت تمام شد نسخه سکندر نامه بری در ماه سفر [صفر ؟] بتاریخ ١۴ ١٨٩۶ بید خط بنده احقر العباد محمد بخش ابن شیخ محمد عظیم مفتی ... در موضع بادپور تحریر یافت سنه ۱۲ ٥۶"', 'Incipit: "خدایا جهان پادشاهی تراست زما خذمت [خدمت] آید خدائی تراست ..."', 'Title from colophon on p.393.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the opening part (Sharafʻnāmah or Iskandarʻnāmah-i barrī) of Niẓāmī's celebrated poetic account of the legend of Alexander the Great."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 328', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.366 (followed by scribal verses), copied by Muḥammad ibn Ḥusayn Ṣafāhānī, known as Jānī, with transcription completed 23 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1009 [ca. 25 June 1601].', 'Former shelfmark: "581 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered (faced) in painted lacquerwork with light brown leather over spine and board edges / turn-ins, possibly constituting repair (lacquer faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in similar light brown leather with gold-painted rule border only partially visible ; upper and lower covers carry painted lacquerwork composition of simple bookcover design with recessed, stamped scalloped mandorla and pendants covered in metallic paint with golden copper hue and bordered in gold-painted accents with further gold-painted rule borders ; now sewn in white, red and green threads, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in magenta and sping green, good condition (protected by tabs of extended spine leather) ; overall in fairly good condition with minor cracking in lacquer, minor abrasion and delamination at board corners, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', "Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper of perhaps two types ; one type with roughly 5 laid lines per cm. (mainly vertical, fairly distinct, some curving) and irregular chain lines only faintly visible, somewhat cloudy formation, inclusions, well-burnished to glossy, thin, crisp and transluscent, dark cream in color ; another type, thicker and sturdier with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (mainly vertical, indistinct, some curving) and no chain lines plainly visible, well-burnished (burnisher's marks visible), dark cream in color ; endpapers and repairs (fills, etc.) in wove paper ; some moisture damage and tide lines.", 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche surrounded by delicate swirling vegetal designs in gold with red, turquoise (pistachio), and white floral accents on a ground of lapis lazuli, gold and black surrounded by bands of gold, turquoise, white (with black crosses) and red and surmounted by a scalloped dome (or semi-circular piece) in gold and lapis lazuli with similar floral vegetal designs, all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; similar illuminated headpieces (also of exquisite execution and in slightly better condition) at opening of second daftar (p.216) and third daftar (p.306) ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of a gold band defined by black fillets with outermost blue rule ; section headings rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant, delicate hand in medium to narrow line ; characteristically serifless with gentle effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct or nearly conjoined (closely adjacent) dots, point of final and free-standing nūn often set down in wide bowl, shaqq (sarʹkash) of kāf often slightly detached from ascender, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page with written area divided to two columns ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, 22 IV(176), IV-1 (183), i ; exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "باتمام رسید دفتر سيیوم از سلسله الذهب من کلام افصح الفصحا مولانا عبد الرحمن جامی علیه الرحمة والغفران لعون الله تعالی وحسن توفیقه والصلوة والسلام علی نبیه وآله اجمعین بتاریخ یوم الاثنین بیست و سیوم شهر ذی الحجة الحرام سنه تسع والف کتبه اضعف عباد الله محمد بن حسین صفاهانی المتخلص به جانی غفر ذنوبه وستر عیوبه ..."', 'Explicit: "همه مقبول و مستجاب شده همه مقرون بفتح باب شده بهمین نکته ختم شد مقصود لله الحمد و العلی و الجود"', 'Incipit: "لله الحمد قبل کل کلام بصفات الجلال والاکرام حمد او تاج تارک سخنست صدر هر نامه نو و کهنست ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of Silsilat al-ẕahab, the first of the seven seven mas̲navīs of Jāmī (d.1492) collected under the title Haft awrang. Descriptive contributions from Sarah Mirza.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 578', 'Origin: As appears below colophon on p.167, transcription likely completed 905 [1499 or 1500], with the date given in numerals (numeral khamsah looking like an inverted \'B\' and numeral ṣifr looking like a closed hāʼ) ; paper, etc. and birth notices on p.168 are consistent with this dating. Colophon indicates that the copy was executed by the owner, one ʻAlī ibn ʻAbdī [?] (علي بن عبدي), though the text of the colophon seems to read "...وقع الفراغ في اول رجب سنه و تسعون [؟] و خمس مائة" indicating first of Rajab 591 [ca. 11 June 1195] as a date of completion. This may represent a mistake on the part of the copyist with "... اول رجب سنه خمس وتسعمائة ..." (or something to that effect) being the intended reading. In such a case the copy may be dated to 1 Rajab 905 [ca. Febrary 1500]. Alternatively, the colophon may have been copied verbatim from another manuscript.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.3-4) -- c. Numerous inserts carrying glosses (pp.11-12, 39-40, 49-50, 51-52, 57-58, 59-60, 111-112, 153-154, 155-158 [bifolium]).', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 160" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OAi 4), along with tooled border in a series of rules ; sewn in dull pink or beige thread, two stations ; endbands virtually gone though traces of headband remain ; overall in somewhat poor condition with much abrasion, lifting and losses of leather, some pest damage, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines (horizontal) grouped in threes with 8-10 mm. between chains and 34-49 mm. between groups (see p.66, etc.) ; fairly thick, dense and sturdy, quite well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; written area of first few leaves surrounded by red rule-border (through p.19) ; numerous diagrams (in red and black ink) tracing inheritance arranged artistically in margins.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Turkish [?] hand ; serifless with tilt to the right and slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation and exaggerated thickness of horizontal strokes, freely ligatured ; colophon in script approaching taʻlīq.', 'Layout: Written in 3-5 lines per page, with allowance for extensive interlinear and marginal glosses arranged artisitically in geometric shapes ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 8 IV(64), III+1 (71), i ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads " تمت الكتاب بحمد الله وحسن توفيقه على يد عبد الضعيف المذنب [؟] الى رحمة الله تعالى وقع الفراغ في تاريخ اول رجب سنة وتسعون وخمس مائة [؟] صاحبه ومالكه علي بن عبدي [؟] تاريخ سنة 905 [؟]"', 'Explicit: "يرث بعضهم من بعض الا مما ورث كل واحد منهم من مال صاحبه"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله حمد الشاكرين والصلوة والسلام على خير البرية محمد واله الطيبين الطاهرين قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم تعلموا الفرائض وعلموها الناس ..."', 'Title from inscription on upper board lining.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the celebrated work on the law of inheritance by Sirāj al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Sajāwandī (fl. 12th cent.), with extensive marginal and interlinear glosses.'])

en: (count: ["Origin: As appears in colophon on p.195, copied by Yūsuf Yuḥannā with transcription completed 25 Abīb (Epep, Epeiph) 1508 of the Martyrs' Era, corresponding to Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1206 [i.e. ca. 30 July 1792].", 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 166" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Boards covered in textured maroon cloth ; Western style binding ; upper and lower covers embossed with diamond-shaped central ornament with intersecting vertical and horizontal cartouches ; sewn in white thread, six stations ; overall in good condition.', 'Support: European laid paper with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 29 mm. apart (vertical) and three crescents watermark (see p.10, 11, etc.) ; fairly thick and sturdy, burnished.', 'Decoration: Some headings and keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh ; large, bold, somewhat angular Egyptian hand ; partially seriffed with blob / dot head-serif on occasional ascender (even free-standing alif), point of final nūn often set quite deep and nearly encircled by bowl, pointing in distinct dots, alif maqṣūrah pointed as yāʼ, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf), extensively vocalized ; pages 19, 20, 24, 25 supplied in a different hand.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, V-2+1 (9), 8 V(89), V-2 (97), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads " وكان الفراغ منه يوم الاتنين المبارك الذي هو الخامس والعشرون من ابيب في سنة ط هي د تمانيه وخمسمايه واللف للشهدا الاطهار السعدا الابرار نفعنا الله بشفاعاتهم امين والموافق دلك في العربي العاشر من شهر الحجه سنه 1206 سته ومايتين واللف عربيه احس الله العاقبه الي خير وسلامه امين ودلك علي يد الحقير يوسف يوحنا فهو يضرب المطانوه تحت اقدامكم تدعوا له بالغفران هو ووالديه ومن قال شيا فله عوضه اضعاف في ملكوة السموات امين"', 'Explicit: "وبعد ذلك تنيح وجنزوه كما يليق بالكهنه ودفن في مقبرة الابا وعند تمام الاربعين من نياحته تنيحة امرااته ودفنت بجانبه واما ابنهم المتقدم ذكره ازداد في الصوم والصلاه والصدقات علي الفقره ولم يترك شيا مما خلفوه ابواه الا وفرقه علي المساكين وعاش في الكهنوت سيره صالحه نحو من سبعين سنه وتنيح في شخوخيه حسنه مرضيه ونحن نسال ربنا والاهنا ومخلصنا يسوع المسيح ان يبعد عنا كل الهواجس الشيطانيه والاوجاع البدنيه والمحن الزمنيه بشفاعه العدري الزكيه والدة الكلمه الازليه والملايكه العلويه وبطلبات ماري مرقس الانجيلي الكاروز بالديار المصريه وجميع الابا والانبيا والرسل والشهدا والقدسين وكلمن ارضي الرب باعماله الصالحه من المتبدي والي اخر الايام والي دهر الداهرين امين تم وكملت سيرة القس نصير مع ابنه القس مرقس بسلام من الرب امين والشكر لله امين"', 'Incipit: "بسم الله الرووف الرحيم نبتدي بعون الله تعالي وحسن ارشاده بنص سيرة القس نصير الاسكندراني وابنه مرقس بسلام الرب امين. الحمد لله فاحص الامور الذي نقلنا من الظلمه الي النور وعتقنا من العدو الغدور فلنسبحه علي ممر الازمان والدهور ونستشفع بصلاة مريم ام النور ونساله يزكي افهامنا وينير اذهاننا امين. قال كان بمدينة اسكندريه كاهنا يدعي القس نصير وله زوجه قديسه تسما طابيتا التي تاويلها غزال وكانوا اغنيا جدا لكن كانوا موجوعين القلوب من اجل عدم الدريه لانهم لم يكن لهما ولد قط وكانوا يكتران الطلبه الي الله سبحانه وتعالي ان يرزقهما ولدا يرث غناهما ..."', 'Title from opening on p.5.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Anonymous work which tells the story of a Coptic Christian priest of Alexandria and his son, Marqus, a dialogue with many popular stories, sayings, and references to the customs and manners among Christians, Muslims, and Jews in 18th century Egypt. Contains many idioms of 18th cent. Egyptian Arabic dialect. Cataloguing provided mainly by Derek Mancini-Lander and Marijana Kavčič.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Three crescents. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), p. 24.', 'Contains diagrams and tables.', 'Text rubricated; marginal corrections in hand of copyist (same as that of Mich. Isl. Ms. 723,2).', 'Date and name of copyist in colophon: tammat hādhihi risālah ... ʻalá yad kātibihā al-faqīr ilá Allāh ... Muḥammad ʻIrāqī al-Shiblanjī[?] ... wa-kāna dhālik fī 24 Rabīʻ al-awwal sanat 98[0?] [4 August 1572?].', 'For another copy of this text see Mich. Isl. Ms. 835,11.', 'Pp. [4-24]. Bound with: Risālah mukhtaṣarah fī al-rubʻ al-mashhūr bi-al-muqanṭarāt, pp. [24-30].', '"A treatise on the use of the sinuated quadrant."'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 36', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper may suggest late 15th or 16th century.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 34. Manahij al-abrar." ; on tail edge "۲٤٣".', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (pink, blue, white) with spine, fore-edge flap, and edges/turn-ins in red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in paper ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; endbands virtually gone, only traces of primaries remain ; in poor condition with flap ill-fitting and much abrasion, staining, pest damage and numerous repairs in heavy textured tape.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with laid lines, somewhat indistinct, oriented horizontally and spaced 6-7 laid lines per cm. ; chain lines only sporadically visible as short lengths or a few cases in pairs (spaced roughly 16 mm. between the chains) ; lightly sized and burnished ; more rough than smooth.', 'Decoration: Written area surrounded by a simple rule-border of blue fillets ; text rubricated with keywords in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; large, elegant hand ; sans serif ; effect of words descending to baseline ; slight tilt to the left ; contrast in line thickness with heavier horizontal strokes ; initial hāʼ looking like two inverted commas.', 'Layout: Written in 8 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: IV-1 (7), 7 IV(63), 2 I(67) ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "التفت اليهما فقالت ما حاجتكما فقالا جئناك زائرين مسلمين قالت قد خلفتما قوما عني لا تشغلاني عن عبادة ربي فاني ابادر طي صحيفتي فسئل عنها فقيل هذه مليكة بنت محمد بن المكندر [ اي المنكدر] بلغ مبلغه [كذا]"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعل لنا الى سلوك مناهج الابرار سبلا لائحة ونصب لنا على لزوم مدارج الاخيار ادلة واضحة ... وبعد فاني لما رايت مجالس العلوم في زماننا هذا بتجلي العلوم وغامضها معمورة وخطوطها اهلها منها موفورة الا علوم المعاملة فانها اصبحت منبوذة مهجورة ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' fol.1a (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the work on religious life for the seeker or Sūfī novice by the Zaydī imām al-Muʼayyad Billāh Aḥmad ibn al-Ḥusayn.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 377', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; dated inscription on recto of second front flyleaf provides a rough terminus ante quem of 1796 ; paper, decoration, etc. also suggest late 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "464 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "٤٥٠" also on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in gold-flecked yellow-tinted paper ; upper and lower covers carry exquisite stamped (with gold-painted orange recessed onlays) mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition incorporating chī clouds, compare Déroche class. NSd), pendants and cornerpieces with tooled and gold-painted accents (rosettes, strokes, etc.) as well as elaborate guilloché roll borders built up from a series of s-shaped stamps and defined by gold fillets ; sewn in dark pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in dark pink and thread and with gold sheed, good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion, etc. ; subtle repair to fore edge flap.', "Support: non-European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (mainly vertical, curved, fairly distinct) and irregular chain lines occasionally visible, some inclusions, beige in color, crisp and transluscent though quite sturdy, highly burnished ; added table of contents mainly on European wove paper, well-burnished (burnisher's marks visible) ; partial offset of upper portion of headpiece in margin of incipit facing page (p.21) ; flyleaves in European laid paper.", 'Decoration: Brilliant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of Siyer-i Veysî on p.20, consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral motifs in pink, orange, red and yellow on fields of gold, surmounted by scalloped w-shaped piece filled with swirling floral vegetal composition in gold, pale green, pink, yellow, red, etc. on a gold ground, itself surmounted by elaborate vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue with gold and red accents, entire piece set in a well consisting of bands of red with white accents, pink with red accents, and gold interlace ; another illuminated headpiece at opening of second part of Siyer-i Veysî on p.178 ; still another superb illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of Zeyl-i Nabi on p.320, consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral motifs in gold and pink, surmounted by scalloped w-shaped piece filled with swirling floral vegetal composition in gold, pale green, pink, orange, etc. on a gold ground, itself surmounted by elaborate vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue with gold and red accents, entire piece set in a well consisting of bands of red with white accents, pink with red accents, and heavy gold interlace ; written area surrounded by heavy gold frame defined by black fillets, divisions within (poetic passages, etc.) defined by narrow faint gold bands outlined by black fillets ; section headings, key words and passages, and occasional vocalization rubricated or overlined in red ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Turkish hand ; serifless with slight effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, mainly closed counters, pointing in conjoined dots ; partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 34 V(340), ii ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: [Siyer-i Veysî] "جناب پيغمبرى اولمديغنه دليل جليل لا ينتطح فيه عنزان نابفه سيله [؟] تسليت بخش خاطر عمير اولدقلريدر والله تعالى اعلم بحقايق الامور" ; [Zeyl-i Nabi] "اشتماليله اعلاى درجات امتيازده جلو كر قلنمق شيوۀ خفيۀ تقديردن مستبعد دكلدر والله تعالى اعلم"', 'Incipit: [Siyer-i Veysî] "كنون وقتست كزكلك سخن كوى بسوى ذكر پيغمبر نهم روى" ; [Zeyl-i Nabi] "يا رب سحاب فيضى باران ايله اول فيضله كشت كامى ريان ايله ..."', 'Title from opening of added table of contents (p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', '7. p.320-p.677 : [Zeyl-i Nabi] / Nabi.', '6. p.318-p.219 : [blank].', '5. p.178-p.317 : [Siyer-i Veysî, part 2] / Veysî.', '4. p.177 : [blank].', '3. p.20-p.176 : [Siyer-i Veysî, part 1] / Veysî.', '2. p.12-p.19 : [blank].', '1. p.2-p.11 : [table of contents].', "Elegant copy of Veysî's (d.1628) work on the sīrah of the Prophet through the battle of Badr in two parts, followed by the continuation (dhayl / zeyl) composed by Nâbî (d.1712). Table of contents on added leaves at opening (pp.2-11). Contribution to the cataloguing from H. Mottaghi."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 674', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.229, copied by Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm, known as Khayr [?] Allāh Zādah (Hayrullahzade Mehmet İbrahim) with transcription completed during the last days of Muḥarram 1053 [April 1643].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From front flyleaf, "IL 247a" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled laid paper (blue and salmon on white) with dark brown leather over spine and fore-edges/turn-ins ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in pale pink paper ; sewn in dull pink, two stations ; only traces of endbands remain, blue and pink threads over leather core ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of spine leather, delamination of boards at corners, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper ; mainly with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 27-29 mm. apart (horizontal), crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.74, 75, 80, etc.) and "A C" under trefoil countermark (see p.74, etc.), sturdy, cream in color, well-burnished ; another type occasionally interspersed with the first, having 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26-27 mm. apart (horizontal), and three hats watermark (see p.174, 175, etc.), thinner, crisper and darker in color, well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Keywords rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red inverted commas ; overlining in red ; written area surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; rather fine Turkish hand ; virtually serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline (occasionally more exaggerated), elongation of horizontal strokes, quite rounded with mainly curvilinear descenders (some sweeping, rightward descenders mainly majmūʻah), pointing in distinct or conjoined dots, point of final nūn set quite deep in bowl, partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 11 V(110), V-1 (119) ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "جف قلم زائرة عن تسويد هذه السير النبوى عم بعون الله الملك العزيز الغني عن يد اضعف عباد الله تعالى محمد بن ابراهيم الشهير خير [؟] الله زاده المولوى الخطيب اصلح شانهم وصانهم عما شانهم وقع الفراغ في اواخر محرم الحرام لسنه ثلث وخمسين والف م"', 'Explicit: "خواجۀ عالم ايله صلى الله عليه وسلم پاك ومجلى وحليۀ صحت ايله محلى اولوب مدة العمر درد پاى كورمك اولمدى تمت الحمد لله على التمام وعلى حبيبه افضل السلام"', 'Incipit: "كنون وقتست كزكلك سخن كوى بسوى ذكر پيغمبر نهم روى"', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the first part of Veysî's work on the sīrah of the Prophet. Numerous poetic and other excerpts on added leaves at opening and close of codex."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 318', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.358, copied by Niẓām ibn Mīr ʻAlī with transcription completed in Rabīʻ I 1035 [December 1625].', 'Former shelfmark: "126 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in glossy, surfaced-dyed blue wove paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold-painted guillioché roll (series of s-shaped stamps) and flanking rules ; sewn in dark brown or gray thread, two stations, tightly bound ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, good condition ; housed in sturdy slipcase covered in dark purple / blue leather with tooled and gold-painted borders and rosette accents, lined with yellow paper and fitted with peach / orange woven pull cord ; overall in fairly good condition ; one narrow side of slipcase detaching.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly distinct) and occasional single chain lines visible, dense and sturdy though transluscent, medium cream in color, well-burnished ; some creasing, tears and cockling due to tight binding ; repairs in European laid paper and wove paper.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpieces at opening of preface on p.2 and at opening of dīvān proper (with ghazals) on p.9, each consisting of large rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche surmounted by rectangular piece filled with scalloped domes in gold and lapis all overlaid with swirling floral vegetal decoration in red, yellow, green, light blue, etc., set in a rich well of heavy gold interlace and turquoise, dark red / brown, and gold bands, and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) ; text of incipit and facing page at opening of preface and opening of dīvān set off by gold cloud-bands ; written area surrounded by gold frame of medium gold band and outermost gold and blue fillets, divisions within defined by narrow gold bands outlined in black ; keywords and headings chrysographed ; some overlining in gold.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; spacious, elegant hand in a medium line ; characteristically serifless with gentle descent of words to baseline, elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots, point of final nūn set down in somewhat narrow, slightly angled bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page with written area divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 22 IV (176), II-1 (179), i ; almost exclusively quaternions ; cathwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "تمت بعون الله الملک الغنی فی ید العبد المذنب نظام ابن میر علی غفر ذنوبه فی تاریخ شهر ربیع الاول سنه خمس وثلثین والف من الهجرت النبویه', 'Explicit: "گفتم سخن تو گفت حافظ گفتا شادی همه لطیفه گویان صلوات"', 'Incipit: "حمد بیحد و ثناى بیعد خداوندی را که جمیع دیوان حافظان ارزاق بپروانه ..."', "Title from inscriptions on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Dīvān of the masterful poet Ḥāfiẓ (Khvājah Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad Shīrāzī, d.1390?). Contributions to the cataloguing from Elizabeth Kunze.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 330', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.261, copied by Muḥammad ibn Mullā Mīr al-Ustādī [?] with transcription completed 10 Rabīʻ II 981 [ca. 9 August 1573].', 'Former shelfmark: "179 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf / \'title page\' (now affixed to each other, p.1) ; ٩٥١ on tail edge of text block.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in quite dark brown (to black) leather with dark red-brown leather repairs to spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in dark red leather with central mandorla, pendants and cornerpieces in filigree appliqué over blue paper and green silk as well as tooled border ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal composition reminiscent of Déroche class. OSd 2) with pendants, cornerpieces and a series of bordering lozenges as well as a tooled border ; design continues on flap ; sewn in dull pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in dull pink and pale green [?], fair condition ; overall in fairly good condition with much abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (mainly vertical) and occasional pairs of chain lines faintly visible, dense and sturdy, quite heavily sized and burnished ; written area mounted in tinted leaves (mainly pink except for pp.134-144 where tinted pale orange or peach) ; some breakthrough at frames.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of large rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by pendants and surrounded by swirling arabesque with floral accents in red, turquoise, yellow, and gold on a field of lapis lazuli with border in white and turquoise bands outlining heavy gold interlace, surmounted by band of black with arabesque and floral motifs in turquoise, white, yellow, red, etc. and scalloped triangular piece or hasp continuing the floral vegetal design on fields of gold and lapis lazuli, all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area gold-flecked and surrounded by heavy frame in gold, turquoise, red and blue bands and rules ; keywords and section headings rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes, gāf marked with three dots.', 'Layout: Written in 12 lines per page ; written area often divided to two columns to set-off poetry ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 3 III(18), 6 IV(66), III (72), IV (80), III (86), IV (94), III+1 (101), 3 IV(125), III (131) ; ternions and quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads "فرغ عن تحرير هذه الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب كتبه العبد المذنب محمد بن ملا مير الاستادى في دهم شهر ربيع الآخر سنه ٩۸١ م"', 'Explicit: "قطع کردیم برین نكته سخن ختم الله لنا بالحسنی هو مولانا نعم المولی"', 'Incipit: "المنة لله که بخون گر خفتم یکچند چو غنچه عاقبت بشگفتم"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of Subḥat al-abrār, the fourth of the seven seven mas̲navīs of Jāmī (d.1492) collected under the title Haft awrang.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 359', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p. 209, copied by Shāh Muḥammad al-Kātib ; date of transcription not specified though copyist, paper, decoration, etc. suggest 16th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Slip of wove paper with note (describing manuscript) in ink in hand of G. Meredith-Owens [?], reads "359 Subḥat al-abrār An ethico-religious poem by Jāmī. Copied by Shāh Muḥammad Late XVth century (?)."', 'Former shelfmark: "480 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Boards covered in maroon leather ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in comb marbled paper (in shades of red, pink, blue, yellow, etc.) ; upper and lower covers carry gold rule borders ; bord edges and turn-ins gold-stamped with foliate design ; spine gold-stamped with title ("CÉPA-TUL EBRARE"), bands and foliate design ; edges of text block gilt ; now sewn in white thread over recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands (traces of pink and yellow primaries from original endbands appear as well) ; register (bookmark) in royal blue ribbon, affixed at head of spine ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion and staining.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical and horizontal, curved though fairly distinct) and some chain lines visible (also not very straight and occasionally grouped, see p.176), cloudy formation, thin and crisp, and quite well-burnished.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of large rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by pendants and surrounded by swirling arabesque with floral accents in red, lavender, white, light blue, yellow, and gold on a field of lapis lazuli with border in red and light blue bands, surmounted by a wide band of lapis lazuli filled with arabesque and floral motifs in light blue, pink, red, yellow, etc. with black and gold accents, all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area surrounded by gold frame with outermost blue rule, columns within defined by narrow gold bands outlined in black fillets ; section headings, some keywords and glosses rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of blue and red inverted commas.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless, with slight effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page, often divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 17 III(102), II (106), ii ; almost exclusively ternions ; catchwords present (though often cut-off) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "كتبه العبد المذنب شاه محمد الكاتب تم تم تم"', 'Explicit: "قطع کردیم برین نکته سخن ختم الله لنا بالحسنى و هو مولانا نعم المولى ... خاک قدم سکان کویت باشم نسبت بسک تو بیوفایی نکتم"', 'Incipit: "المنة لله که بخون گر خفتم یکچند چو غنچه عاقبت بشگفتم"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of Subḥat al-abrār, the fourth of the seven seven mas̲navīs of Jāmī (d.1492) collected under the title Haft awrang.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 445', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. suggest 17th or even very late 16th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "427 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in purple silk [?] with green straight-grain leather over spine and edges/turn-ins (textile faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in spring green surface-dyed paper ; leather edging silver-stamped with scrollwork / s-shaped motifs ; now sewn in magenta thread, six and four stations ; overall in somewhat poor condition with upper cover, flyleaves and opening leaf fully detached from remainder of text block, splitting of spine leather, minor abrasion, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persianate) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, mainly pretty indistinct) and no chain lines plainly visible, quite dense and sturdy though transluscent, well-burnished, beige in color ; flyleaves in European wove paper.', "Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening consisting of rectangular piece carrying empty gold cartouche flanked by swirling vegetal design (in gold, lavender, red, pink and white) on fields of light blue and gold surounded by heavy border in red and white with gold outline and surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) carrying similar vegetal composition set into a green and gold well or frame and itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in light blue ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of gold bands flanking a red band all outlined in black fillets ; section headings, keywords (author's name, etc.), and text of ḥadīth chrysographed ; a few keywords rubricated.", 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Turkish hand ; virtually serifless with tilt to the left, many open counters, curvilinear descenders, and some elongation of horizontal strokes ; extensively vocalized (in black ink).', 'Layout: Written mainly in 13 lines per page ; column of written area divided to two columns for text of preface/prologue, elucidation, and epilogue whereas text of headings and ḥadīth fill the column width ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, V (10), V+1 (21), ii ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords possibly lost to trimming.', 'Explicit: "عمر اولوب ايرنجه روزقيام سكا والكه صلوة وسلام الحمد لله على التمام والصلوة والسلام على سيدنا محمد خير الانام وعلى آله الكرام واصحابه العظام"', 'Incipit: "ايلدي حق بزي بحمد الله قائل لا اله الا الله"', 'Title from preface (fol.4a).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the collection of one hundred ḥadīth accompanied by paraphrase in Turkish verse by Latîfî (Abdüllatif Çelebî Kastamonulu, d.1582).'])

en: (count: ['Chiefly astronomical tables.', 'Some rubrication in tables.', 'Astronomical tables containing planetary ephemerides.'])

en: (count: ["Illuminated ʻunwān and marginal rosettes on pp. [1-2]; verse endings marked with large gold dots; on p. [46], gold foliate decoration marks end of text and beginning of colophon; text enclosed in gold gorders; copyist's name on p. [46]: katabahu al-faqīr ... al-sayyid ʻAbd Allāh [i.e. Seyyid Abdullah Enam-i-Şerif, according to Muhittin Serin, note on catalog card in repository, April 1993]....", 'Contains sūrah 6 of the Koran, al-Anʻām (The Cattle).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 391', 'Origin: Culmination with Sultan Abdülmecid I suggests a dating during his reign (i.e. 1839-1861) though bulk of roll (three opening lengths through Sultan Mustafa III, r.1757-1774) likely produced earlier, even during his reign. Final length certainly produced at a different time than the opening lengths with a different paper, narrower written area, wider gold frames, and exclusive use of gold bands (and wreath motifs) and black fillets to set off and join roundels.', 'Binding: Wrapped in a length of layered paper attached to the opening of the roll, covered in spring green silk and red leather tooled in exquisite vegetal design (swirling leaves and flowers set in almond-shaped form) in two contrasting shades of gold (compare design on cover of Isl. Ms. 276) with wide, heavy woven silk ribbon wound to secure it ; narrow wooden dowel is affixed to the inner end of the roll ; roll comprised of four main lengths of paper with additional length lining the interior of the leather wrap ; housed in custom box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of two main types, in several lengths glued together ; three opening lengths in a type with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical, i.e. along the length), chain lines spaced 28-31 mm. apart (horizontal, i.e. across the width), and watermark with three points only partially visible, resembling star (compare no.559 dated 1772 in Nikolaev, Watermarks of the Ottman Empire, vol.1) or possibly foolscap or crozier ; final length in type with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, i.e. across the width), chain lines spaced 27-29 mm. apart (vertical, i.e. along the length), and watermark of eagle with wings and legs spread, "G F [A]" below ; all highly sized and burnished.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of scroll, consisting of small rectangular piece with two empty cartouches surmounted by large, elaborate spray of plumes, leaves, floral bouquets and ribbons in varied shades of blue, lavender, pink, red, yellow and green on a stippled gold ground, bordered in bands of pink, blue, white and gold ; interior of leather wrap surrounding the scroll appears just above this headpiece and carries in a rectangular field of stippled gold a composition of similar motifs with large central floral bouquet (in shades of pink, blue, lavender, yellow, etc.) set in a basket with plumes / leaves (in shades of lavender and white) at the four corners, surrounded by pattern of flowers and saz leaves in gold on a light blue ground ; introductory text and field of genealogical diagrams surrounded by gold frame ; names of sultans in opening three lengths of paper appear in roundels bordered in gold bands with outermost red and blue rules, with names of siblings, offspring, etc. in roundels of red and gold rules, all linked by further lines in gold or red ; names in final length of paper bordered in roundels of gold bands and black fillets only, with gold bands linking them ; textual dividers in the form of gold discs in opening lengths of paper ; keywords and dates rubricated throughout.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Ottoman hand in a medium line ; characteristically serifless with effect of words inclining to the right and descending to baseline, elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in conjoined dots, final or free-standing nūn with point set above or just inside wide, dramatically angled bowl, freely ligatured.', 'Layout: Genealogical diagram (genealogical tree) preceded by introductory text in 21 lines.', 'Incipit: "طبقۀ ملوك عثمانيان بونلرك اجدادى آل سلجوق ايله تركستاندن خروج ايدوب خراسان وعراق وازربيجان وسائر ممالكى مسخر ايدوب يوز يتمش يل اخلاص وعيد الجواز نام مقامده اولوب ..."', 'Title from rubricated heading at opening.', 'Ms. composite roll.', 'Elegant silsilename of the Ottoman sultans through Abdülmecid I (r.1839-1861) in rotulus format (i.e. scroll opening vertically).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 493', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, hand, etc. would suggest mid to late 17th or even early 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.1-2) -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 39c" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (mainly in dark blue and salmon) with dark brown leather over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins (framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap, envelope flap now lost) ; board linings in lavender or indigo paper ; upper and lower covers carry tooled border in a series of striated s-shaped stamps ; sewn in cream or light yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in light yellow and light rose, losses to head and tail ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of leather and paper, loss of envelope flap, fore edge flap detaching, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with roughly 7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 27 mm. apart (vertical), crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.20, compare no.147 in Regourd, Catalogue cumulé des bibliothèques de manuscrits de Zabid, fascicule 1 and nos. 273 and 286 in Nikolaev, Watermarks of the Ottoman Empire, v.1), and "Z" and "Vd" with trefoil countermarks (see pp.18, 30, 74, etc., again compare Nikolaev nos. 273 and 276, as well as 198, 218, 282, 339 and Regourd, no.148) ; glazed (to glossy) and well-burnished, sturdy and fairly crisp.', 'Decoration: Headings and keywords rubricated ; occasional textual dividers in the form of inverted commas.', "Script: Naskh ; clear Turkish or 'Syrian' hand ; virtually serifless (though occasional head-serifs do irregularly appear) with slight effect of tilt to the left and of words descending to baseline, rounded with curvilinear descenders, some elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct or conjoined dots, open and closed counters.", 'Layout: Written in 11 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: i, 10 V(100), III-1 (105), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts and flyleaves).', 'Explicit: "قلت لانه اعجبه الحديثان اوهما [اولهما] من باب الوعظ بمخالفة الهوى ومتابعة الشرع وثانيهما ترغيب في الدعاء فزاد خيرا وهذا اخر ما اوردناه وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم تسليما كثيرا امين م"', 'Incipit: "قال الشيخ الامام العلامة الرحلة بقية المجتهدين ... عز الدين محمد بن جماعة بعد حمدا لله والصلوة والسلام الاتمان الاكملان على نبيه محمد واله وصحبه هذا شرح حسن على الاربعين النواوي رحمة الله تعالى على مصنفها في احاديث النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم مسمى بالتبيين في شرح الاربعين ..."', "Title from opening matter (author's preface) on p.9.", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the commentary by ʻIzz al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Abī Bakr Ibn Jamāʻah (d.1416) on Kitāb al-Arba‘īn, or al-Arbaʻūn al-Nawawīyah, a well-commented collection of 40 traditions selected by Muḥyī al-Dīn Abū Zakarīyā Yaḥyá ibn Sharaf al-Nawawī (d.1233).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 381', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. suggest 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "177 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather with dark red leather over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in silver-flecked orange paper, hinge and pastedown once covered with pink wove paper ; upper and lower covers block-stamped with gold-painted vegetal design and central mandorla of blue paper, red paper, and green silk covered by gilded leather filigree and surrounded by pendants and cornerpieces as well as tooled border and block-stamped, gilded rectangles above and below, band of red paper, blue paper, and green silk lozenges covered with gilded leather filigree, flanked by tooled borders in gold, and surrounded by tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps in gold ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in light green, dark blue, and pink thread ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, pest damage, loss areas, and corner damage, large losses in upper pastedown.', 'Support: European laid paper of at least two types ; first type with roughly 12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines (vertical) spaced roughly 22 mm. apart, burnished, thin and crisp with watermark of grapes surmounted by a cartouche inscribed with "I R" and a crown motif (see p.184, etc., compare 2384 in Heawood lf. 94, Raison no. 22, p.28, 385 in Velkov, Les Filigranes dans les documents Ottomans, appearing in a ms. transcribed in Istanbul, 1727) ; second type with roughly 13 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines (vertical) spaced roughly 25 mm. apart, burnished, thin and crisp with watermark of grapes surmounted by a cartouche inscribed with "GAILLIARDON [?]" and a crown motif (see p.200, etc., compare Raisin no.30 A, pp.28-29, 52, 387 in Velkov, appearing in a ms. transcribed in Istanbul, 1749).', 'Decoration: Superb illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2 consisting of a rectanglular piece with empty gold cartouche surrounded by vegetal designs in pink, red, white, and gold on a blue field surmounted by a w-shaped piece filled with vegetal designs in pink, red, white, and gold on a blue field with delicate vertical stalks (tīgh) in red and blue above, all set in a well of red bands with white crosses, a thick band of geometric interlace, and a thin blue band with white crosses ; additional illuminated headpieces on pages 451, 609, and 932 less elaborate than the initial headpiece and each with scalloped semi-circular piece surmounting similar rectangular piece ; text of written area surrounded by frame consisting of a thick gold band defined by black fillets, divisions within defined by thin gold bands outlined by black fillets ; keywords and headings mainly rubricated but also supplied in blue ink (p.154-159), in orange ink (p.438-450), and chrysographed (after p.1218) in certain sections ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas mainly in dark red but supplied in blue ink p.154-159, in orange ink p.438-450, and chrysographed after p.1218).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant hand in a medium line ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, and pointing mainly in conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page, occasionally divided to two or three columns to set off poetry ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 63 V (630), IV+1 (639), i ; chiefly quinions ; oblique catchwords on the verso of each leaf ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "وبارك لنا فيهم و جعلنا في لاآخرة من مجاوريهم "', 'Incipit: "ابتدى بسم ربى المتعال مالك الملك واهب الامال ..."', "Title from inscription on added 'title page' (front flyleaf).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of Tacüʻt-tevarih, the celebrated history of the Ottomans from their beginnings to the death of Selim I (r.1512-1520) carefully composed by the well-known Ottoman şeyhülislam, statesman and historian, Hoca Sadeddin Efendi (d.1599). Descriptive contributions from Nick Krabbenhoeft.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 12', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests 18th century.', "Accompanying materials: a. Between pp.80-81, machine-made paper with accounts -- b. between pp.172-173, a commendation slip dated 1318 [1900] issued by a civil primary school in Erzurum and carrying the director's seal -- c. between pp.390-391, accounts slip on laid paper.", 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 67. Commentary on Kuran."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in untinted laid paper with spine light brown leather (effective quarter binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in maroon, intact at head and tail ; in fair condition with only minor abrasion on at corners and some red rot on spine leather.', 'Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertial) and chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart (horizontal) ; pot watermark in at least three designs, one with empty interior except for bisecting line, two handles, four feet, with lid and surmounted by stalk and crown, another carrying "M" with lid surmounted by stalk and crescent, and another carrying "P B" with lid surmounted by stalk and floral motif.', "Decoration: Qur'ānic text overlined in red.", "Script: Naskh ; clear Turkish hand ; mainly serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, mainly open counters, curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots, use of both freely ligatured with waw and lām occasionally assimilated, etc. ; chapter headings seriffed with rightward serif on alif and lām ; occasional vocalization added to Qur'ānic quotations by glossator ; glosses in several other hands.", 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page.', 'Collation: i, 25 IV(200), IV + 1 (209) ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "اله الناس من شر الوسواس اي الموسوس الوسواس بفتح الواو و"', 'Incipit: "قوله تعالى والسماء ذات البروج الى اخر السورة قال الشيخ ابو الحنيفي رحمة الله عليه اعلم ان في هذه السورة كلاما من خمسة اوجه احدها في فضائل قرأتها والثاني في عدد اياتها وكلماتها وحروفها والثالث نزولها والرابع في تفسيرها والخامس فيما يتصل بها"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Clear copy of an odd final volume of a commentary on the Qurʼān attributed to Abū Saʻīd al-Ḥunayfī (al-Ḥanīfī), beginning in Sūrat al-burūj (85) and continuing through Sūrat al-nās (114). Incomplete with final leaves missing (ends in verse four of the final sūrah). Description provided mainly by Sarah Mirza.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 462', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.289, Tafsīr al-Wāḥidī copied by Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm ... al-ʻIyāḍī [?] and Aḥmad ibn ʻAlī during the days of their examination with their shaykh Abū Zakarīyā ʻAlī ibn ʻAlī, with transcription completed 15 Jumādá I in what appears to be a year between 1001 and 1100. Paper, etc. suggest 17th century. As appears in colophon on p.323, Sharḥ al-Qaṣīdah al-Shaqrāṭīsīyah copied by Muḥammad al-Saʻīdī ibn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Waghlīsī for Abū [?] Zakarīyā Yaḥyá ibn Muḥammad ibn ʻAlī al-Kharrāṭī al-Farāwṣanī. Date of transcription not specified ; paper, etc. suggest 17th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. University of Michigan General Library charge slip for "Traité de versification arabe" -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From front flyleaf (p.1), "IL 50 D" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Covers lost, only spine (in dark brown leather) remains ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; only traces of endbands remain ; overall in quite poor condition with upper and lower covers lost, lifting and losses of spine leather, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper of two main types ; opening type with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines difficult to view but seemingly spaced roughly 35-40 mm. apart (horizontal), and possible three hats watermark (see p.92/p.106, Heawood 2596, etc.) ; following type also with 7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines roughly 25 mm. apart and watermark of crescent in circle with cross [?] (see pp. 233-4, 245-6, 269-70, 301-2, etc.) ; all quite sturdy and well-burnished ; extensive pest damage.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, excerpts and abbreviation symbols (mainly sigla) rubricated ; occasional textual dividers in the form of three dots.', 'Script: Maghribī ; two main hands, quite elegant with sweeping descenders, etc. ; occasional vocalization (in red).', 'Layout: Written in 31 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: I-1 (1), V+1 (12), V (22), V+1 (33), V (43), VI (55), II (59), VI (71), V (81), VI (93), 3 V(123), I (125), 3 V(155), V-1 (164) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: [Tafsīr al-Wāḥidī] "Scribal," rectangular, reads "كان الفراغ منه يوم الخميس بعد صلاة الظهر في شهر الله المعظم جمادى الاول في اليوم الخامس عشر منه عام [...؟] بعد الالف ... من الهجرة النبوية على صاحبها الصلاة والسلام ... على يد العبد الفقير ... محمد ابن محمد ابن ابراهيم الشوشي [؟] العياضي تاب الله عليه وغفر له نسخته انا وسيده احمد بن علي ... على ايام امتحاننا ... الى شيخنا ... ابي زكريا سيده علي بن علي ... والحمد لله رب العالمين ولا حول ولا قوة الا بالله العلي العظيم" ; [Sharḥ al-Qaṣīdah al-Shaqrāṭīsīyah] "Scribal," rectangular, reads "تأليف الشيخ الشهير السيد الاكمل الفقيه القاضي ابي عبد الله محمد بن محمد بن معزة الهواربي رحمه الله على يد العبد الفقير ... الراجي عفو ربه وغفرانه محمد السعيدي بن محمد بن محمد الوغليسي نسبا [؟] المالكي مذهبا الاشعري اعتقادا غفر الله له ولوالده ... نسخته للفقيه الاجل الموحد الافضل ابعلا [ابو ؟] زكريا يحيى بن محمد بن علي الخراطي الفراوضي ... الحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Explicit: [al-Waraqāt] "ووجه الدليل ان النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم قد خطا المجتهد تارة وصوبه اخرى والله سبحانه اعلم وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم تسليما انتهت الورقات المفيدات لامام الحرمين ابي المعاني الجويني رحمه الله"', 'Incipit: [Tafsīr al-Wāḥidī] "وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم تسليما كثيرا كثيرا كثيرا الحمد لله الكريم بالائه والعظيم بكبريائه القادر فلا يمانع والقاهر فلا ينازع ... اما بعد فان لكل زمان نشوة ولكل نشوى علما"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. composite codex.', '4. p.324-p.327 : al-Waraqāt al-mufīdāt / Imām al-Ḥaramayn Abū al-Maʻālī al-Juwaynī.', '3. p.292-p.323 : [Sharḥ Qaṣīdat Abī Muḥammad ʻAbd Allāh ibn Abī Zakarīyā Yaḥyá ibn ʻAlī ibn Zakarīyā al-shahīr bi-al-Shaqrāṭīsī ] / Abū ʻAbd Allah Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad ibn Maʻazzah al-Hawāribī.', '2. p.289-p.291 : [assorted excerpts].', '1. p.4-p.289 : [Tafsīr al-Wāḥidī] / Abū al-Ḥasan ʻAlī ibn Aḥmad al-Wāḥidī.', "Fine Maghribī copy of Abū al-Ḥasan ʻAlī ibn Aḥmad al-Wāḥidī's (d.1076) terse philological commentary on the Qurʼān entitled al-Wajīz fī maʻānī al-Qurʼān al-ʻazīz, followed by a commentary on al-Qaṣīdah al-Shaqrāṭīsīyah and the text of al-Waraqāt fī uṣūl al-fiqh of Imām al-Ḥaramayn Abū al-Maʻālī al-Juwaynī. Additional excerpts from other text appear on front flyleaf (p.1), 'title page' (p.3), following the tafsīr (p.289-p.291), and verso of final leaf (p.328)"])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 316', 'Origin: As appears in a different hand following colophon on p.341, transcription possibly completed 920 [?] [1514 or 15 ?] ; decoration, paper, etc. appear to confirm dating of early 16th century or even late 15th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "193 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red-brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures (and flyleaves) in magenta-tinted laid paper with gold-painted and gold-flecked central rectangular panel and gold-painted border ; upper and lower covers carry recessed, stamped and gold-painted mandorla (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition with chī clouds, compare Déroche class. NSd) with pendants and cornerpieces as well as tooled border ; edges of text block gilt ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in purple and golden yellow, in poor condition with headband damaged and tailband gone ; overall in somewhat poor condition with abrasion, staining, pest damage, lifting of leather, boards detaching, spine leather and lining detached, etc. ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, quite indistinct) and no chain lines apparent, sturdy and well-burnished ; some staining and pest damage.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of preface on p.2 consisting of rectangular piece with now empty gold cartouche flanked by four-lobed pendants and all surrounded by floral vegetal motifs in gold, blue, white, red, yellow, red and lavender on a field of blue (approaching lapis lazuli) with white, green, gold and blue borders, surmounted by scalloped w-shaped piece filled with swirling floral vegetal design in gold, blue, white, red, yellow, red and lavender on fields of blue (approaching lapis lazuli) and gold, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue with gold chī cloud accents ; illuminated marginal decoration in the form of swirling vegetal composition with large floral motifs all in gold with red accents, varying double page after double page ; additional exquisite illuminated headpieces at opening of dīvān on p.10 and at section opening on p.26 ; written area throughout surrounded by a frame in gold and turquoise bands defined by black fillets and outer blue and red rules ; text of incipit and facing page set off with gold cloud-bands ; keywords chrysographed ; occasional floral accents in gold, red and blue appear between divided columns of text or to the side ; illuminated tailpiece following colophon on p.341 consisting of an inverted triangular shaped piece heavy gold vegetal composition on a dark red ground with flanking swirling floral accents in gold and red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; compact, elegant hand ; serifless, with characteristic effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes, pointing in distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 14 lines per page ; written area often divided to two columns to set-off poetry ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, II (4), I (6), 9 IV(78), 2 III(90), V (100), II (104), 8 IV(168), I+1 (171), ii ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, mainly in Arabic, reads "قد وقع الفراغ من تحرير هذه الديوان الموسوم بلسان الغيب من كلام افصح الفصحاء واملح البلغاء حافظ شمس الدين محمد الشيرازى غفر الله له سنه ٩٢٠ [?]"', 'Explicit: "فروغ نور ازآن فرخنده مرقد"', 'Incipit: "حمد بیحد و ثناى بیعد و سپاس بیقیاس حضرت خداوند یرا که جمیع دیوان حافظان ارزاق ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Dīvān of the masterful poet Ḥāfiẓ (Khvājah Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad Shīrāzī, d.1390?).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 465', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.214, copied by Muḥammad ʻAlī with transcription completed 20 Shaʻbān 1238 [ca. 2 May 1823], likely for Muḥammad Saʻīd who is mentioned as owner in the colophon.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover (upper doublure), front flyleaf (p.1), and spine label, "IL 55" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in dark red leather ; upper and lower covers carry border in a series of tooled fillets ; inscriptions referring to contents in black ink ( "الفاتحة | فاتحة الكتاب" ) on upper cover ; sewn in cream thread, eight stations, sewn over narrow, thin cloth strips ; worked endbands in cream and pink, some damage ; overall in somewhat poor condition with significant staining, moisture damage, some lifting and losses of leather (at board corners especially), detached at spine (including lower cover), etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, curved) and single chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (horizontal, somewhat irregularly visible) ; thin and transluscent though sturdy, crisp, cloud formation, some inclusions, beige in color, well-burnished to glossy ; staining and tidelines.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings and abbreviation symbols (mainly stroke above words of interest) rubricated ; some overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Persianate hand ; mainly serifless with very slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders (some sweeping), occasional slight effect of words descending to baseline, many open counters, pointing (for two and three dots) mainly in distinct dots, some free assimilation of letters, bowl of final nūn somewhat wide with point set just down inside.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page.', 'Collation: iv, 12 IV (96), IV-1 (103), iv ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular and triangular, reads "تم تفسير سورة الفاتحة نقل من تفسير الكبير للامام فخر الدين الرازي رحمة الله تعالى عليه بعون الله الوهاب عز ذكره في شهر شعبان فتحت فيه ابواب الجنان يوم الجمعة مضت منه عشرون يوما سنة ۱۲۳٨ الف وماتان وثمان ثلثون بعد هجرت النبي صلى الله عليه واله وامه ابيه رب اغفر وارحم لمن قرأ هذا الكتاب ونظر فيه ولكاتبه محمد علي ولمالكه مجازا محمد سعيد ولوالديه واحسن اليه واليهما تم"', 'Explicit: "بدليل قوله الست بربكم قالوا بلى وصفة الرحمن لوسط حالهم وصفة الملك لنهاية حالهم بدليل قوله لمن الملك اليوم لله الواحد القهار والله اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والمآب"', 'Incipit: "اللهم يا رب يا حي يا قيوم يا بديع ... الكلام في سورة الفاتحة وفي ذكر اسماء هذه السورة وفيه ابواب الباب الاول اعلم ان هذه السورة لها اسماء كثيرة ..."', 'Title from colophon on p.214.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the commentary on Sūrat al-Fātiḥah taken from Fakhr al-Dīn al-Rāzī's (d.1210) great commentary on the Qurʼān, Mafātīḥ al-ghayb or al-Tafsīr al-kabīr."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 500', 'Origin: As appears in colophon for Tafsīr al-Fātiḥah on p.365, transcription completed 8 Muḥarram 1096 [ca. 15 December 1684]. Neither colophon names the copyist.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda (pp.1-2) -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas (pp.3-4).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 244" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards now covered in several layers of paper including untinted laid paper (manuscript waste) and purple wove paper with dark brown leather over spine and at fore edge of lower cover (likely part of a repair to the flap, now lost) ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; board linings in layers of untinted laid paper ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked endbands in yelllow and red, only traces remain ; overall in quite poor condition with loss of flap, significant abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, moisture damage, shrinkage in lower cover, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 25-28 mm. apart (horizontal), three crescents watermark (90 mm. long, perpendicular to chains, see p.48, etc.) and crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.76, 77, etc.) ; lightly burnished, sturdy and fairly thick though crisp ; staining and cockling.', 'Decoration: Section headings and keywords mainly rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of red hāʼ.', 'Script: Naskh ; angular, compact Egyptian or Syrian [?] hand in a bold line ; serifless with pointing in distinct dots, bowl of final nūn usually closed to form a complete circle surrouning the dot, descenders rather rectilinear (some sweeping), elongated in the horizontal, kāf mabsūṭah preferred.', 'Layout: Written in 20-22 lines per page.', 'Collation: V+1 (11), 17 V(181) ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in brown ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: [Ṭahārat al-qulūb] "وهذا انتهى الينا من طهارة القلوب والخضوع لعلام الغيوب رحم الله قارئه وكاتبه وسامعه وغفر الله لمن دعا لكاتبه بالمغفرة ... تم م م م م م" ; [Tafsīr al-Fātiḥah] "وكان الفراغ من النسخة المباركة نهار الجمعة ثامن محرم الحرام سنة ستة وتسعين والف م م م"', 'Explicit: "فاسقنا الغيث يا ارحم الراحمين قال فارخت السماء بمطر عظيم حتى تساوت الحفر والاكام وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه وسلم والحمد لله وحده وصلى الله على من لا نبيه بعده "', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي تفرد قبل وجود اللغات بالاسماء الحسنى وتوحد في محامد الصفات بالمجد الاسنى الذي وله اليه القاصدون رغبة وطلبا ... وبعد فهذا كتاب فيه فصول يتذكر بها من اصغى اليها بسمع قابل وينتفع بها من كان قلبه روضة فضبها [؟] الظل والوابل ... وسميته كتاب طهارة القلوب والخضوع لعلام الغيوب وانما سميته بهذا الاسم لأني لما اكملته رأيته في المنام وهذا الاسم مكتوب عليه فسميته بذلك ..."', 'Title from oppening matter (p.12) and colophon (p.363).', 'Ms. codex.', '4. p.366 : [blank].', '3. p.364-p.365 : Min kalāmih raḍiya Allāh ʻanhu fī Tafsīr al-Fātiḥah / ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz ibn Aḥmad ibn Saʻīd al-Dīrīnī.', '2. p.8-p.363 : Ṭahārat al-qulūb wa-al-khuḍūʻ li-ʻallām al-ghuyūb / ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz ibn Aḥmad ibn Saʻīd al-Dīrīnī.', '1. p.5-p.7 : [table of contents].', 'Careful copy of the Ṣūfī work by ʻAbd al-ʻAzīz ibn Aḥmad ibn Saʻīd al-Dīrīnī (d.1295), followed by an excerpt from his al-Miṣbāḥ al-munīr fī ʻilm al-tafsīr supplying commentary on the Fātiḥah.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 259', 'Origin: No details on date of transcription or copyist supplied in text.', 'Binding: Painted lacquerwork on heavy boards with black leather on spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in painted lacquerwork with hinges in red leather and flyleaves in pink and blue marbled paper ; upper and lower covers bear paintings of identical composition yet mirror images of one another on a black background ; gold painted fillets define outer and inner frames consisting of a series of gold triangular shapes on bands of black ; the fillets intersect to form square compartments at the corners ; between these frames, an elaborate floral design consisting of an alternating succession of gold lozenges and four-petal flowers in blue, green and bronze ; each gold lozenge contains a central rosette in pink with white accents flanked by four smaller buds in pink and white, leaves in green, and two five-petal flowers in white and pink ; the main panel has a central cluster of two peony-like flowers in pink and yellow with adjacent tulip, poppy, other floral forms, and leaves in pink, white, blue-green, and olive green ; the remainder of the panel is filled with leaves, flowers (poppies, etc.) and buds in pink, white, and olive green ; upper and lower doublures also bear paintings of identical composition yet mirror images of one another on a dark green background (flecked in gold green) consisting of a tall narcissus-like plant with leaves in shades of green and at the head of a central stalk, flowers and buds in yellow with pink accents; gold painted fillets define a frame consisting of a series of oblique strokes in gold on the dark green background ; appears contemporaneous with text ; in fair condition ; much worn, leather of spine is cracked, brittle and detaching ; lacquer and paint of covers is chipped ; lacquer of doublures is cracked and crazed ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: At least three varieties of European laid paper ; front and back flyleaves (single bifolium following initial marbled paper flyleaf and preceding final marbled paper flyleaf) are of European laid paper with watermark partially visible (lion rampart in shield - compare Heawood 3133 and 3135), few inclusions, 27-28 mm. between the single chainlines ; the beginning and latter quires are in a European laid paper with watermarks partially visible (see grapes watermark in fol.12, watermark in fol.78b-79a and in fol.94 has name "...ARDONI" [?] with crown above and grape below ; compare Heawood 2399), laid lines running horizontally spaced roughly 14 laid lines per cm., single chain lines running vertically spaced roughly 21-24 mm. apart, relatively few inclusions, burnished and crisp character ; central quires are in a European laid paper with laid lines running horizontally spaced roughly 12 laid lines per cm., single chain lines running vertically spaced roughly 26-27 mm. apart, virtually no inclusions, and a lighter "whiter" cream color than the other paper.', 'Decoration: Partially rubricated with overlinings, section headings, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; at least four Turkish (and Persian?) hands, though perhaps supplied by one or two copyists ; first work appears to be supplied in two hands and the line thickness changes at least once ; the first hand is very round, nearly unpointed, mainly serifless, with slight effect of words descending to baseline ; hand changes on fol.8a (p.15) to a stiffer hand better pointed with initially some right sloping head serifs, then mainly serifless ; second work is supplied in a heavy Turkish hand with slight tilt to left, mainly serifless but occasional serifs on alif of lām alif ligature (looking like numeral ۹) ; passages following this work appear in the same rounded, unpointed hand of first work ; next work is supplied in another very fine hand, virtually serifless and also in the rounded, unpointed hand of the first work and the hand of second work ; next work is supplied in a similar fashion with same rounded, unpointed hand supplying the closing text.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: iii, VI+1 (13), 7 V (83), VI (95), V+1 (106), iii ; chiefly quinions ; leaves at beginning and end of textblock left blank, as well as between the various works ; catchwords present in the various works though cut off in some places ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Explicit: "لابي عمرو في غاية ابي العلا وللدوري من التبصرة ومثلها لكن مع التسهيل في الكامل والله اعلم"', 'Incipit: " هذا من النشر الكبير المفقود في اكثر النسخ قبل فرش الحروف رواية ورش اذا قرى له من طريق الازرق... [تحرير المنصوري] الحمد لله رب العالمين وصلى الله وسلم على سيدنا محمد وعلى اله وصحبه اجمعين وبعد فيقول العبد الفقير الى الله تعالى علي المنصوري غفر الله تعالى له ولوالديه ولجميع المسلمين هذا ما يسر جمعه في بعض الايات عن تحرير الطرق والروايات من طريق طيبة النشر في القراءات العشر"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '10. fol.106a-106b : [blank].', '9. fol.100a-105b : [Excerpt from Taḥrīr al-Manṣūrī, begins "Qāla fī al-Nashr aṣḥāb ʻadam al-sakt..."]', '8. fol.96a-fol.99b : [Excerpt, begins "Qawluh taʻālá al-ṭalāq martayn..."]', '7. fol.95a-fol.95b : [blank].', '6. fol.94a-fol.94b : [Excerpts from Taḥrīr al-Manṣūrī?] / ʻAlī al-Manṣūrī.', '5. fol.14b-fol.93b : Hādhā mā yassara jamʻahu fī baʻḍ al-āyāt ʻan Taḥrīr al-ṭuruq wa-al-riwāyāt min ṭarīq Ṭayyibat al-nashr fī al-qirāʼāt al-ʻashr / ʻAlī al-Manṣūrī.', '4. fol.12b-fol.14a : [blank].', '3. fol.12a : [Excerpt with figure, begins "Li-hamzah ithná ʻashar wajhan..."].', '2. fol.2b-fol.11b : Hādhā min al-Nashr al-kabīr al-mafqūd fī akthar al-nusakh / Ibn al-Jazarī [?].', '1. fol.1a-fol.1a : [blank].', 'Collection of excerpts on Qur\'anic readings, mainly from ʻAlī ibn Sulaymān al-Muqriʼ al-Manṣūrī\'s Taḥrīr on Ibn al-Jazarī\'s Ṭayyibat al-nashr fī al-qirāʼāt al-ʻashr preceded by a "lost" passage attributed to Ibn al-Jazarī from his al-Nashr fī al-qirāʼāt al-ʻashr.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 113', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests 16th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Scrap paginated pp.41-42.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 157. Commentary on al-Risalat al-shamsiyah."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in dark green leather ; upper and lower covers bear large blind-stamped and gold-painted mandorla (compare Déroche class. OAi 4), pendants and corner pieces with floral vegetal composition, accompanied by gold-painted border of tooled fillets framing a narrow roll in a series of s-shaped stamps ; design continues on envelope flap ; doublures and interior of envelope flap carry simple tooled and gold-painted ornaments in interlace accompanied by border in tooled and gold-painted fillets ; sewn in lime green thread, two stations ; endbands lost ; overall in quite poor condition with abrasion, staining, some lifting and losses of leather, severe delamination of boards, pest damage, traces of adhesive on doublures and interior of envelope flap, envelope flap almost fully detached, etc. ; housed in envelope for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10-11 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced roughly 39 mm. apart (horizontal) ; hand/glove watermark with six leaves/six-pointed star above (compare Heawood 2482) ; lightly burnished ; staining and tearing.', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening (p.2) consisting of rectangular piece surmounted by semi-circular piece (dome) ; rectangular piece bears central cartouche in gold carrying title of work "كتاب شرح قطب الدين" in white (now somewhat oxidized), surrounded by floral vegetal design in shades of gold, pink, white, blue, etc. on fields of blue (lapis lazuli/cobalt) and gold ; entire rectangular piece is surrounded by frame with white crosses on a band of blue flanked by gold fillets ; semi-circular piece continues design found in rectangular piece and is surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by simple frame consisting of a two gold bands outlined by black fillets, thereafter (through p.20) written area surrounded by red rule-border ; keywords and abbreviations rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Ottoman hand ; mainly serifless, with occasional head serifs appearing irregularly ; slight effect of tilt to the left ; many open counters ; rightward descenders fairly flat and tapered ; kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred ; text of incipit and facing page extensively vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: V-1 (9), 2 V(29), 2 IV(45) ; what appears to be an anomalous quinion followed by two quinions and two quaternions ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes insert).', 'Explicit: "او كان هناك قرينة دالة على المراد جاز استعمالها تمت بعون الله وحسن توفيقه تم"', 'Incipit: "ان ابهى درر تنظم ببنان البيان وازهر زهر تنثر في اردان الاذهان ... وبعد فقد طال إلحاح المشتغلين على المترددين الي ان اشرح لهم الرسالة الشمسية وابين فيه القواعد المنطقية ... فوجهت ركاب النظر الى مقاصد مسائلها ... وسميت [كذا] بتحرير القواعد المنطقية في شرح الرسالة الشمسية ..."', 'Title from opening on p.3.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of the popular commentary by Quṭb al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Rāzī (al-Quṭb al-Taḥtānī) on Najm al-Dīn ʻAlī ibn ʻUmar al-Kātibī al-Qazwīnī's renowned treatise on logic."])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Sun; hillock. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), nos. 2610-2616 and no. 3897.', 'Text rubricated; marginal corrections in hand of copyist (same as that of Mich. Isl. Mss. 835,2-4,7-11); pages foliated; "yā kabīkaj" (invocation against bookworms) written on pp. [1] and [5]; vol. has edge title.', 'Date based on that in colophon of Mich. Isl. Ms. 835,6.', '[10] Badr al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad Sibṭ al-Māridīnī, Hidāyat al-sāʾil fī al-ʻamal bi-al-rubʻ al-kāmil, pp. [246-265]; [11] Muḥamamd ibn ʻAlī al-Khayrī al-Jabartī ibn Zurayq, al-Nashr al-muṭayyab fī al-ʻamal bi-al-rubʻ al-mujayyab, pp. [266-282].', '[6] Muṣṭafá ibn ʻAlī, Hādhihi risālat Muṣṭafá al-muwaqqit fī aʻmāl al-aṣṭurlāb, pp. [104-182]; [7] Muṣṭafá ibn ʻAlī, Hâzâ risale-i-muaddel el-nahār, pp. [188-208]; [8] Muṣṭafá ibn ʻAlī, Hâzâ risale-i-zāt el-kürsî, pp. [210-237]; [9] Ḥusayn ibn Khalīl Qrlfj Zādah, Risālat al-rubʻ al-mujayyab, pp. [238-244];', 'Pp. [6-17]. Bound with: [2] Muṣṭafá ibn ʻAlī, Risālat al-muqanṭarah, pp. [18-33]; [3] Muṣṭafá ibn ʻAlī, Risale-i-rubʻ el-mucayab, pp. [36-75]; [4] Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥīm al-Murrī, Risālah mulakhkhaṣah fī al-ʻamal bi-al-ālah al-rusūm al-mujannaḥah, pp. [78-95]; [5] Two faṣls on the use of the astrolabe, pp. [97-100];', 'Treatise on the calendar.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 393', 'Origin: As appears at close of final table on p.241, transcription of that section completed 1267 [1850 or 51]. Other sections continuing the tables likely date from around the same time, though later additions (by subsequent readers / owners) also appear (see final entry on p.129 dating to 1277 [1861]). Many sections including the opening matter, opening of the chronological and other tables, khātimah, etc. appear to date much earlier, likely the late 17th century given that the chronological matter for these sections ends around 1080 [1669 or 70] (see p.95).', 'Former shelfmark: "518 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on interior of upper cover.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red / maroon leather ; Type III binding (without flap), two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; board linings and flyleaves in orange surface-dyed European laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OAi) with gold-painted accents and border ; sewn in yellow thread, four stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and purple, head and tail damaged (core nearly exposed) ; overall in fair condition with abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, lower cover detaching at split joint, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; main type with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 32-33 mm. apart (horizontal) and three crescents watermark (100 mm. long perpendicular to chains, see p.18, 60, etc.), thick, sturdy, cream in color, well-burnished ; later sections (pp.97-140, 147-208, 215-226, 238 to close) on other papers including one with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (vertical) and watermarks of crescent with face in profile in shield and "A" below (see p.98, 100, etc.) and eagle with "GFA" below (see p.102, 114, etc.) also "A G" countermark (see p.150) and double-headed eagle (see p.244, 252, etc.) ; flyleaves and added leaves on still two other papers, one with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 27-30 mm. apart (vertical), and crown-star-crescent watermark (71 mm. tall parallel to chains, see p.4, 8, etc.), sturdy and beige in color, the other with 11-12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 16-33 mm. apart (vertical) and watermark of three circles with crown above, cross in top circle (see p.6, etc.).', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece at opening on p.18 consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral motifs in gold, pink, lavender, red, and white on grounds of gold and dark blue, surmounted by scalloped dome filled with swirling floral vegetal composition in gold, pink, lavender, red, white and yellow on grounds of dark blue and gold, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue, entire piece set in a well of lavender defined by "gold" bands ; written area surrounded by frame consisting of narrow bronze colored band defined by black fillets with outermost red rule, divisions within (for tables) in red rules, in final sections red rules only ; keywords and some headings rubricated, others in blue, green or orange ; textual dividers in the form of gold and red discs.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; at least two elegant hands (hand changes at p.96) ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes ; headings in many of the tables in a large, elegant naskh.', 'Layout: Written in 19-21 or 29 lines per page (opening matter, i.e. preface and introduction, and khātimah), with tables (جداول) divided to roughly 8-21 rows (in roughly 26-29 lines) and two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV (8), 4 V(48), VI (60), V (70), 2 VI(94), V (104), VI (116), V (126), i ; mainly quinions with a few senions ; several leaves among the chronological tables ruled but left partially or entirely blank (see pp.138-140, pp.148-149, pp.157-166, etc. ); catchwords present ; foliation (begins with table on p.30) in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and added leaves at opening).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "تمت الكتاب بعون الملك الوهاب سنه ١٢۶۷"', 'Incipit: "حمد وثنا وشكر بى انتها اول مبدأ اول جل وعلايه كه فهرست غرايب كاينات وفذلكۀ عجايب واقعات اولان اوراق پر اثمار توارخى ... وبعد چون فن جليل القدر تاريخده فضل وشرف مقرر ... در كتابه وضع تقويم كيفيتى تعليم ومنشأ تواريخى تفهيمده ..."', 'Title from inscription on front flyleaf (p.1) and from closing matter (p.211).', 'Ms. composite codex.', "Elegant composite copy of Kâtip Çelebi's collection of chronological tables (through 1059 [1649]) intended as an index to his Fadhlakat al-tawārīkh [فذلكة التواريخ , or Fezleke], with continuation. The chronological tables are preceded by an introduction, followed by tables of the various pre-Islamic (see p.141) and Islamic (see pp.142-147) dynasties, and tables for the Ottoman sultans (see pp.150-156), Şeyhülislam (pp.167-175), Grand Viziers (pp.180-193), etc. and closing matter (pp.209-211). Final entry in the chronological tables is for the year 1277 [1861] with the death of Sultan Abdülmecid I and ascension of Sultan Abdülaziz I (see p.129), though the tables are ruled and headed through the year 1321 [1903-4] (see p.137)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 220', 'Origin: As appears in colophon at end of roll, main section copied by Ḥusayn Ibrāhīm ibn Muḥammad al-Ḥusaynī al-Khurāsānī with transcription completed in Dhū al-Ḥijjah 727 [?] [October-November 1327?] ; opening section (and repairs to main section) certainly much later than main section, perhaps 18th or 19th century.', 'Accompanying material: a. Metal case in the form of a cylinder decorated with incised diamond pattern with lid (only slightly convex) ; case retains one ring through which a cord may have passed, a second ring has been lost -- b. Waxy, brown oil cloth now in two pieces which once wrapped roll inside case.', 'Support: Each section in a distinct paper type ; opening section (first 895 mm., roughly 104-107 mm. wide, three pieces of paper) in type with roughly 10-11 laid lines per cm. (parallel with the length of the roll, fairly distinct) and no chain lines or watermarks plainly visible, dense and sturdy, burnished ; bulk of roll (roughly 3530 mm., 110-112 mm. wide, at least six pieces of paper) on a non-European (likely Persian) paper, highly sized and burnished, reinforced with further paper backing and repairs.', 'Decoration: Text of opening section bordered by red double-rule border, table / jadwal with ninety-nine names ruled in red, border texts defined by red rules, openings with depiction of the "seal of prophecy" (مهر نبوت) here "صوره مهر نبوت حضرت رسالت پناهی" ; main section opens with a long cartouche (oriented along the length of the roll) with illuminated heading "اسماء الله تعالى" in thuluth and basmalah in plaited and knotted kufic, a central field filled with floral and vegetal designs executed in micrography, bordering lozenges and alternating circles filled with further micrography (mainly chrysographed, some in blue and black) and Qurʼānic texts in large tawqīʻ approaching thuluth (chrysographed), and further border of rubricated Qurʼānic text in fine riqāʻ ; an even longer cartouche appears next, with illuminated headings for each of several sections ("من اسماء الله تعالى نودونه نام،" "هذا دعاء حرز الاماني،" اسماء الاربعون") which are each in a different layout incorporating the nintey-nine names, Qurʼānic and prayer texts in ghubār, naskh, thuluth, tawqīʻ, etc. in gold, red, black and some blue in a highly symmetrical fashion, with the various elements defined by heavy bands of gold flanked by red double-rules.', 'Script: [opening section] Naskh and tawqīʻ ; [main section] Naskh, thuluth, tawqīʻ, riqāʻ, ghubār, plaited and knotted kufic.', 'Layout: [opening section] central written area in a single column (text written perpendicular to length of the roll) bordered in Qurʼānic and ḥadīth texts along the length of the roll, ninety-nine names arranged in a ruled table / jadwal (five cells wide by twenty cells tall), text following the heading for "the prayer of the bāzūband" ("دعا بازوبند حضرت شاه ولايت پناه") in 26 lines ; [main section] an elaborate arrangement of text consisting of a central narrow panel filled with text first arranged in a series of diagonal arrays (each read across in a zig-zag fashion), next in a series of five circles executed in micrography, and finally in rectangular fields of roughly nine horizontal lines, all interspersed with headings and surrounded by two heavy borders of cartouches, circles and rectangles filled with Qurʼānic and prayer texts in various scripts, closing with dedication and colophon.', 'Dedication: "اللهم وخل بدخلك [؟] دوله الامير الاعدل الاعظم الاعلم الاشجع الاكرم سلطان الامراء في العالم انك دولت همه از دولت اوحي طلبنا والملك العادل ... خلد الله تعالى ملكه ودولته الى يوم الدين"', 'Colophon: "كتبه العبد حسين ابراهيم ابن محمد الحسيني الخراساني في ذي الحجة سنه سبع وعشرين وسبعمائة [؟]"', 'Incipit: "صوره مهر نبوت حضرت رسالت پناهی ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. roll.', '[main section] اسماء الله تعالى -- من اسماء الله تعالى نودونه نام -- هذا دعاء حرز الاماني -- اسماء الاربعون', '[opening section] صوره مهر نبوت حضرت رسالت پناهی -- نودونه نام باری تعالی -- دعا بازوبند حضرت شاه ولایت پناه', 'Composite talismanic scroll (rotulus, i.e. opening vertically) consisting of two sections of distinct production, now joined. Originally wrapped in oil cloth and housed in metal case.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 980', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 129', 'Binding: Boards covered in black textured cloth ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a geometric pattern (resembling a scale pattern) in olive green or dull gold ; cover gold-stamped with "المبدأ والمعاد" ; stab sewn in white thread, tightly bound (gatherings difficult to discern and second section perhaps simply composed of individual leaves rather than gatherings of bifolia), some leaves loose ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Machine wove paper of two different types, both sturdy, cream in color.', 'Decoration: Text executed almost entirely in red ink.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a thin line ; serifless and freely ligatured with effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 9-11 lines per page.', 'Collation: Cathwords present ; pages between two main sections left blank (see pp.48-49) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "وكما ان ذاته تعالى مبدأ ... للاشياء بنفس ذاته كذلك علمه فهو جل وعز علم بجميع الموجودات"', 'Incipit: "اللهم صل على نقطة مركز باء الدائرة الاولية وسر اسرار الالف القطبية ... مقدمة قال حجة الاسلام ابو محمد الغزالي ان لجناب الحق صدر وفي مقدمة الصدر مجال وميدان رحب وعلى اول الميدان عتبة ... لهذا كله وجب علينا قبل الشروع في الربوبيات تقديم مقدمة مشتملة على بيان الحقيقة الانسانية وما فيها من العوالم اجمالا فنقول حقيقة الانسان حقيقة جمعية وحدتها كوحدة العالم وحدة تأليفية ذات مراتب كثيرة من التجرد والتجسم والصفاء والكدورة والنور والظلم ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy of what appears to be the opening sections of an abridgment of Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī's (d.1641) al-Mabdaʼ wa-al-maʻād (compare Isl. Mss. 979 and 965)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 630', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. suggest 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas -- c. Slip with notes (paginated pp.81-82).', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover, "IL 59c" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (once in dark blue, salmon, lavender, lime green, etc.) with dark red-brown leather over spine, fore edge flap, and edges/turn-ins (framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in untinted laid paper ; sewn in dark pink thread, two stations ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of boards, upper cover fully detached, etc. ; repairs in tan leather ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 23 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks including grapes (raisin) with crown above (see p.150, 155, etc.), arms in circle with crown above (see p.152, 153, etc.), and name (see p.148, 157, etc.), thin and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished to glossy, medium cream in color.', 'Decoration: Simple illuminated headpiece at opening on p.2 consisting of an arrangement of abstract floral forms in gold defining the shape of a triangular piece (or hasp) ; text of incipit and facing page for opening work (pp.2-3) surrounded by gold frame ; thereafter written area surrounded by a red rule-border ; keywords, passages of text being commented upon, sections headings, etc. rubricated ; textual divders in the form of letter hāʼ (or three) in red ; some overlining in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Turkish hand ; virtually serifless (though alif of lām-alif ligature resembles ٩), in places fairly vertical and elsewhere with effect of tilt to the left, rounded with curvilinear descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, occasional sweeping tails (final yāʼ, qāf, etc.) ; partially vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: 7 V(70), VI-1 (81) ; almost exclusively quinions ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes one insert and mistakenly skips two pages between p.95 and p.96).', 'Incipit: [Talkhīṣ al-Miftāḥ] "الحمد لله على ما انعم وعلم من البيان ما لم نعلم و الصلوة على سيدنا محمد خير من نطق بالصواب ... اما بعد فلما كان علم البلاغة و توابعها من اجل العلوم قدرا و ادقها سرا ..." ; [al-Masālik] "الحمد لمن علم الانسان ما احتواه القرآن ... اما بعد فلما رفع العزيمة من اغتنم باقتباس انوار شمس العالمين اضعف الخلائق حمزة بن درغود نور الدين على حج بيت الله البيت الحرام وتقبيل عتبة سيد الانام ركب السفينة من قسطنطنية ... فاشتغل بحفظ تلخيص المفتاح ... فرتب بعد قضاء الوطر رسالة على مقدمة ومسالك ثلاثة وخاتمة خالصة عن المهالك وموسومة بالمسالك ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '5. p.161-p.162 : [blank].', '4. p.102-p.160 : al-Masālik / Hamza bin Turgut Aydınî.', "3. p.101 : [originally left blank to serve as 'title page' for following work, now carries assorted excerpts].", '2. p.2-p.100 : Talkhīṣ al-Miftāḥ / Jalāl al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd al-Raḥmān al-Qazwīnī.', "1. p.1 : [opening 'title page' with various excerpts, former owners' marks, etc.].", "Fine copy of Talkhīṣ al-Miftāḥ, the abridgment by al-Qazwīnī, Khaṭīb Dimashq, (d.1338) of the third part of Miftāḥ al-ʻulūm by Yūsuf ibn Abī Bakr al-Sakkākī (d. 626/1229) on rhetoric (ʻilm al-maʻānī wa-al-bayān), followed by an abridgment of al-Qazwīnī's abridgment by Nūr al-Dīn Ḥamzah ibn Durghūd [or Ṭurghūd or Ṭūrghūd] (Nurettin Hamza bin Turgut Aydınî, d.1572), entitled al-Masālik. Contents listing on opening 'title page' (p.1) suggests that these two works were once bound with two additional works, now lacking."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 146', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.278, copied by Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad ibn ʻAlī al-Qārī al-Tibrīzī. Transcription completed final day of Muḥarram 884 [ca. 23 April 1479].', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No.107. Talkhis al-miftah."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in light orange laid paper ; upper and lower covers bear blind-stamped mandorla (red leather onlays) filled with vegetal decoration ; sewn in grey thread, four stations ; headband intact, tailband missing ; in fair condition with some abrasion and staining, foreedge flap detaching at lower cover, cover detaching at spine, etc.', 'Support: mainly non-European (Persian) laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and sporadic chain lines, crisp and very well sized and burnished ; a second type (likely European laid) shows 15 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and 23 mm. between chain lines (horiztonal) ; tide-lines from water damage on edges of pages not effecting readability.', 'Decoration: Section headings, some glosses and corrections, and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas and hāʼ or numeral khamsah shape "۵" in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; mainly an elegant Eastern hand, with variation in line thickness ; partially seriffed with occasional rightward head-serif on joined alif and leftward head-serif on medial lām ; mainly open counters ; bowls of letters elongated ; descenders mainly tapered.', 'Layout: Written in 7 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling-board clearly evident).', 'Collation: i, V+1 (11), IV (19), 2 V(39), IV (47), IV+2 (57), V (67), IV+1 (76), V (86), 2 IV+1 (104), V (114), 2 IV (130), V (140), i ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during digitization ; includes flyleaves and skips two pages between pp.55-56).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "الحمد الله على التمام و الرسول افضل السلام تم الكتاب بعن الله و توفيقه على يدي اضعف عباد الله جرما و احقرهم جرما محمد بن علي القاري التبريزي غفر الله لهم ... في سلخ محرم الحرام لسنة اربع و ثمانين و ثمانمائة "', 'Explicit: "وهذا دعاء للبرية شامل و جميع فواتح السور و خواتمها و اردة على احسن الوجوه و اكملها يظهر ذلك بالتامل مع التذكر لما تقدم و الله الموفق للاختتام "', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله على ما انعم و علم من البيان ما لم نعلم و الصلاة على سيدنا محمد خير من نطق بالصواب ... اما بعد فلما كان علم البلاغة و توابعها من اجل العلوم قدرا و ادقها سرا ... و كان القسم الثالث من مفتاح العلوم الذي صنفه الفاضل العلامة ابو يوسف السكاكي رحمه الله اعظم ما صنف فيه من الكتب المشهورة نفعا ... الفت مختصرا يتضمن ما فيه من القواعد و يشتمل على ما يحتاج اليه من الامثلة و الشواهد ... و سميته تلخيص المفتاح و انا اسأل الله من فضله ان ينفع به كما نفع باصله انه ولي ذلك و هو حسبي و نعم الوكيل "', 'Title from opening on p.7.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the abdrigment by al-Qazwīnī, Khaṭīb Dimashq, (d.1338) of the third part of Miftāḥ al-ʻulūm by Yūsuf ibn Abī Bakr al-Sakkākī (d. 626/1229) on rhetoric, ʻIlm al-maʻānī wa-al-bayān. Description provided mainly by Sarah Mirza.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 872', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; depending on what it represents of involvement with the production of the manuscript, seal impression at close provides only a very rough terminus ante quem of 1837 (as seal could have been made years before use here). Paper, etc. consistent with early to mid 19th century dating.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Slip with description (in hand of E. Husselman ?) "Muḥammad Ḥāfiz̤, Shīrāzī | Dīvān. | U. of M. has 6 MSS. of the Dīvān of Hafiz" -- b. Recycled card with notes in hand of Emilie Savage-Smith [according to R. Dougherty] "speckled paper | fine binding | some borders near front complete, others not – shows something about how books made" -- c. Slip with note "counted for 1968/69 Annual Report" -- d. Slip with note "Persian MSS (Heyworth-Dunne?) Husselman notes" -- e. Slip with description in pencil "Ḥāfeẓ (MS) | Divān | Date : | Place: Lucknow"', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 21', 'Binding: Boards covered in brown leather ; Western style binding ; pastedowns and flyleaves in dark red-brown paper ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped central rectangular panel with triangles of vegetal composition accenting an inner diamond design and elaborate border in a scrolling vegetal pattern with gold-tooled accents ; spine gold-stamped with title "DIVAN | E | HAFIZ | - | MS" (likely has been rebacked) ; edges of text block gilt ; sewn in white thread over five recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands in green, white, and red stripes ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, etc.', "Support: non-European laid paper with roughly 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat indistinct, some curving) and occasional chain lines faintly visible, cloudy formation, sturdy, cream in color, well-burnished ; 'written area' into margins silver-flecked, margins flecked in blue with small rectangle left for catchwords ; flyleaves and added leaves in European wove paper ; some staining and tide lines ; gilt edges.", "Decoration: Written area of opening leaves of text surrounded by gold frame defined by black fillets with outermost red rule, divisions within defined by red rules ; 'written area' into margins silver-flecked, margins flecked in blue ; gilt edges.", 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant Indian [?] hand in a medium line ; serifless with effect of words descending to baseline, superscripting of final words and letters (end of each line), pointing in distinct or conjoined dots, some elongation of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page, with written area mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 3 (3), 18 IV(147), III (153), IV (161), III (167), 3 IV(191), III (197), ii ; chiefly quaternions ; several leaves preceding and following the text flecked but left blank ; catchwords present.', 'Explicit: "فحبک راحت فی کل حین وذکرک مونسی فی کل حال"', 'Incipit: "الا یا ایها الساقی ادر کاسا و ناولها که عشق آسان نمود اول ولی افتاد مشکلها ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the Dīvān of the masterful poet Ḥāfiẓ (Khvājah Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad Shīrāzī, d.1390?).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 227', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; decoration, hand, paper, binding, etc. suggest 15th century .', 'Former shelfmark: "398 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf (p.4) ; "50" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.7).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures in burnt red leather with central mandorla in fine leather filigree appliqué over gold leaf (with lapis cloth or paper at center) as well as tooled border ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla (filled with asymmetrical floral composition), pendants and cornerpieces as well as a tooled chain and fillets border ; design continues on flap ; sewn in red thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and lime green, headband in excellent condition (protected by leather spine cap), tailband in fairly good condition with some damage ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, pest damage, etc.', "Support: non-European laid paper with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal or vertical) and occasional single chain lines visible, fairly indistinct, cloudy formation, sturdy and fairly thick, heavily sized and burnished (burnisher's marks visible), cream in color ; leaf carrying 'title page' and incipit page trimmed to leave written area and lower margin and mounted in a leaf cut out to accommodate view of illuminated titlepiece on 'title page' (p.7).", "Decoration: Exquisite illuminated almond-shaped titlepiece on 'title page' (p.7) carries title and author of work in gold on a central field of lapis lazuli with white vegetal accents, surrounded by elaborate border consisting of an inner most band of green (with black crosses) outlined in gold fillets, a heavy band of interlace in gold, and an outermost band with arabesque in red, green, black, gold and white on a field of lapis lazuli ; superb illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.8 echoing design of titlepiece consists of rectangular panel surmounted by a band of arabesque with vertical stalks (tīgh) above ; rectangular panel carries basmalah in white floriated 'Kufic' on a field of lapis lazuli with gold vegetal accents surrounded by same border of innermost green and gold band with heavy band of interlace in gold as appears in titlepiece ; arabesque is also nearly identical to that appearing in titlepiece ; text of written area surrounded by frame consisting of a heavy gold band flanked by narrow inner gold band and outer blue fillet ; keywords, section headings, and abbreviation symbols chrysographed ; textual dividers in the form of gold discs or inverted commas.", 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Persianate hand ; partially serifed with left-sloping barbed headserifs appearing mainly on final lām (and occasional lām of ilá, etc.), curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots (liberally spaced), point of final nūn set down in wide bowl, almost fully vocalized.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling-board visible).', 'Collation: iii, III+1 (7), 8 IV(71), III (77), II+1 (82), III ; chiefly quaternions ; catchwords present but mainly lost to trimming or barely visible ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Explicit: "وهذا دعاء للبرية شامل وجميع فواتح السور و خواتمها و اردة على احسن الوجوه و اكملها يظهر ذلك بالتامل مع التذكر لما تقدم و الله الموفق للصواب واليه المرجع والمآب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله على ما انعم و علم من البيان ما لم نعلم و الصلاة على سيدنا محمد خير من نطق بالصواب ... اما بعد فلما كان علم البلاغة و توابعها من اجل العلوم قدرا و ادقها سرا ... و كان القسم الثالث من مفتاح العلوم الذي صنفه الفاضل العلامة ابو يوسف السكاكي رحمه الله اعظم ما صنف فيه من الكتب المشهورة نفعا ... الفت مختصرا يتضمن ما فيه من القواعد و يشتمل على ما يحتاج اليه من الامثلة و الشواهد ... و سميته تلخيص المفتاح و انا اسأل الله من فضله ان ينفع به كما نفع باصله انه ولي ذلك و هو حسبي و نعم الوكيل"', 'Title from illuminated titlepiece (p.7) and opening (pp.9-10).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the abdrigment by al-Qazwīnī, Khaṭīb Dimashq, (d.1338) of the third part of Miftāḥ al-ʻulūm by Yūsuf ibn Abī Bakr al-Sakkākī (d. 626/1229) on rhetoric, ʻIlm al-maʻānī wa-al-bayān.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 981', 'Origin: Lacks dated scribal colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and eventually bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974). As appears on the \'title page\' for the latter two sections (pp. 33, and 67), copied (and perhaps abridged) by the anonymous "ا ع" who has identified himself as the copyist of other manuscripts eventually bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974), see Isl. Ms. 905, Isl. Ms. 910, Isl. Ms. 937, Isl. Ms. 988, Isl. Ms. 998 and likely Isl. Ms. 929.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 130', 'Binding: Boards covered in textured black cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "الشفاء الحكمي" ; sewn in white thread over two recessed cords ; overall in fairly good condition with minor abrasion to spine leather.', 'Support: Machine wove paper, sturdy, beige in color.', 'Decoration: Text executed almost entirely in blue ink with occasional gloss rubricated.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 11-13 lines per page.', "Collation: i, VIII (16), IX (34), IV-3 (39), i ; pages left blank between sections (which correspond to gatherings), some serving as 'title pages' (see pp.32-33, 66-67) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two pages between pp.53-54).", 'Explicit: "عدم قبول التشكلات او قبولها بعسر او بسهولة"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين صلاته على النبي محمد وآله الاكرمين اجمعين اما بعد فهذا تلخيص وتخليص الفن الثاني عشر من كتاب الشفاء الحكمي لابي علي الرئيس ابن سينا ذلك الفن الذي هو في الحكمة الالهية المشروع فيها بعد الانتهاء من الحكمة الطبيعية والرياضية والمنطقية ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' for each section (pp.1, 33, and 67).", 'Ms. codex.', 'Carefuly copy of an abridgement of Fann 12 of Ibn Sīnā’s (d.1037) Kitāb al-Shifāʼ on al-Ḥikmah al-Ilāhīyah, attributed on the \'title pages\' for the various sections to the anonymous "ا ع", copyist of Isl. Mss. 905, 910, 937, 988, 998, and likely Isl. Ms. 929.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 940', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.65, transcription completed at the first of the Hijrī year corresponding to 1938 [i.e. March 1938]. Likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 89', 'Binding: Boards covered in black cloth with black leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in pink and green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "شواهد | الربوبية" ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper ; some cockling.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a medium to bold line ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 26-27 lines per page.', 'Collation: Pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "وكان الفراغ من تسويد هذه الاوراق في غرة السنة ... الهجرية سنة ١٩٣٨ والله يتولانا ... ويوفقنا كافية السعادة وحسن الختام"', 'Explicit: "وهذا الروح هو الذي قوبل بالملائكة جميعهم والى هنا تم المرام فاح مسك الختام ولاح بدر التمام"', 'Incipit: "مقدمة ان حقيقة الانسان حقيقة جمعية وحدتها كوحدة العالم وحدة تأليفية ذات مراتب واطوار كثيرة من التجرد والتجسم ..."', 'Title from heading at opening on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy of an abridgement of the Shawāhid al-rubūbīyah, one of Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī's (d.1641) last works summarizing his main teachings."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 926', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.422, transcription completed 19 Rabīʻ I 1356, corresponding to 29 May 1937 and 21 Bashans 1653. Likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and eventually bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 75', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "تلخيص | فلسفة ارسطو | الاندلسي | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; compact hand, initially carefully executed in a bold line, later much quicker in a finer line ; serifless and freely ligatured with slight effect of inclination toward the right, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 22-26 lines per page.', 'Collation: Pages between some sections left blank (see pp.14, 24, 42, 44, 67) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly repeats pp.90-91).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," reads "وكان نسخ هذا الشرح في هذه النسخة واقعا في يوم السبت الموافق ١٩ من شهر ربيع الاول ١٣٥٦ والمطابق للتاسع والعشرين من شهر مايو ١٩٣٧ والمصادف للحادي والعشرين من شهر بشنس والحمد لله وحده اولا واخرا وبدأ واختتاما"', 'Title from heading at opening on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', '6. p.175-p.422 : Kashf al-wujūh al-ghurr li-maʻānī Naẓm al-durr / ʻAbd al-Razzāq al-Qāshānī.', '5. p.175 : Min al-Tāʼīyah al-kubrá / Ibn al-Fāriḍ.', '4. p.167-p.175 : Talkhīṣ Ibn Rushd li-Kitāb al-khiṭābah al-Arisṭī / Ibn Rushd.', '3. p.43-166 : Kitāb mā baʻda al-ṭabīʻah wa-huwa al-qism al-rābiʻ min Talkhīṣ maqālāt Arīsṭū / Abū al-Walīd Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad Ibn Rushd al-Andulusī.', '2. p.42 : [blank].', '1. p.1-p.41 : Talkhīṣ kutub Arisṭāṭālīs fī al-ḥikmah al-ṭabīʻīyah / Ibn Rushd.', "Careful copy of a collection (majmūʻah) of works beginning with Ibn Rushd's (Abū al-Walīd Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad, al-Ḥafīd, known in the West as Averroës) celebrated shorter commentaries on Aristotle's treatises on the natural sciences, as well as his Metaphysics and Rhetoric, followed by the commentary by ʻAbd al-Qādir al-Qāshānī (d.1330) [also attributed to ʻIzz al-Dīn Maḥmūd al-Kāshī (d.1334 or 5), see GAL S I 464] on Ibn al-Fāriḍ's celebrated Ṣūfī poem in tāʼ, Naẓm al-sulūk or al-Tāʼīyah al-kubrá. Contribution to the cataloguing from Tzvi Langermann."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 973', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 122', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "الطهارة والتهذيب | ابن مسكويه| J.H.D." ; sewn in white thread over two recessed cords ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Wove paper both lined / ruled and unruled ; inner flyleaves in laid paper.', 'Decoration: Text executed entirely in red ink.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in thin to bold line (line thickness changes) ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 10-16 lines per page.', "Collation: ii, IV (8), 2 VI(32), VIII (48), X+1 (69), VIII (85), VII (99), ii ; pages between sections (corresponding mainly to gatherings) left blank, with some serving as 'title pages' (see pp.19, 43, 67, 99, 141, 173) ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inner flyleaves).", 'Explicit: "شفاءها بالاستنباط مما قد ذكرناه والله يتولي هداه وليكن هذا اخر ما اردنا تلخيصه من متن تهذيب الاخلاق وتطهير الاعراق والسلام على من اتبع الهدى آمين"', 'Incipit: "اللهم انا نتوجه اليك ونسعي نحوك ونجاهد نفوسنا في طاعتك ونركب الصراط المستقيم الذي نهجته لنا الى مرضاتك ... وبعد فالغرض من وضع هذه الرسالة ان نبين الاخلاق التي هي اسباب السعادة ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from close on p.199.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of an abridgment (perhaps by the copyist) of Abū ʻAlī Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad Miskawayh’s (d. 1030) treatise on ethics, Tahdhīb al-akhlāq wa-taṭhīr al-aʻrāq.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 564', 'Origin: As appears in colophons at the close of juzʼ I and the close of juzʼ II, main text copied by Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd Allāh ibn Ṣalāḥ ibn ʻAbd al-Khāliq ibn Jaḥḥāf al-Qāsimī for the patron Fakhr al-Dīn ʻAbd Allāh ibn ʻAlī ibn ʻIzz al-Dīn al-Akwaʻ. Copying of juzʼ I finished 3rd Ṣafar 1090 [ca. 16 March 1679] ; transcription of juzʼ II finished ("wa-ittafaqa al-farāgh min taḥrīr hādhā al-kitāb al-mubārak...") 2nd Shaʻbān 1090 [ca. 8 September 1679]. Gloss copied by al-Ḥusayn ibn Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad ibn Ḥashr. Copying of gloss for juzʼ I finished 10th Ramaḍān 1090 [ca. 15 October 1679] ; copying of gloss for juzʼ II finished ("wa-kāna al-farāgh min raqm hādhihi al-ḥawāshī al-mubārakah...") 7th Shawwāl 1090 [ca. 11 November 1679]. While place of transcription is not explicitly stated, the nisbahs and affiliations of the patron, copyists, and former owners, and other features strongly suggest Yemen.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas. -- b. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda. -- c. note on slip of laid European paper inserted between leaves marked p.398-399 (pagination in pencil, Western numerals).', 'Former shelfmark: From inscription on front flyleaf "IL 470" (likely supplied by Yahuda).', 'Binding: Pasteboard covered with a variety of red (spine), dark brown (covers) and light brown (onlays, flap, repairs) leathers ; Type II binding (with flap) ; upper and lower covers bear blind-stamped mandorla (compare Déroche class. OSd8) with pendants, corner pieces, and border lozenges, all with leather onlays ; doublures of red brown leather ; interior of envelope and foreedge flap in light blue cloth ; pasted label on spine with former shelfmark ; upper doublure inscribed in ink with a verse from the poetry of Ibn Ḥamād al-Baṣrī beginning "لا اشتكي زمني هذا فاظلمه..." ; pasted label bearing illegible inscription on upper doublure ; in somewhat poor condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather, delamination of upper board, etc. ; repairs to spine, fore edge flap, etc. in brown and red leathers.', 'Support: European laid paper of at least two types, a paper bearing the crown-star-three crescent watermark (see p.538 in ms., single chain lines vertical and spaced roughly 21 mm. apart, roughly 10-11 laid lines per cm.), a paper bearing crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.640 in ms., compare Nikolaev, Watermarks of the Ottoman Empire, v.1 nos. 257, 268, 273, etc., Heawood 1132 and Regourd, Catalogue cumulé des bibliothèques de manuscrits de Zabid, fascicule 1, nos. 147, 150 and 151, single chain lines vertical and spaced roughly 30 mm. apart), and a paper bearing the three crescents watermark and crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.650 in ms., compare Heawood 863, single chain lines vertical and spaced roughly 21 mm. apart, roughly 9 laid lines per cm.) with “FC” countermark (see p.652 in ms., compare Regourd nos. 137 and 138).', 'Support: European laid paper of many types ; codex opens with a paper bearing the crown-star-crescent watermark (62 mm. tall, single chain lines vertical and spaced 30 mm. apart, roughly 6 laid lines per cm.) and continues with at least five additional types in the opening juzʼ, concluding with another type bearing the crown-star-crescent with "B" below (see p.326, 356, etc., 101 mm. tall, single chain lines spaced 20 mm. apart, roughly 10 laid lines per cm.) ; other watermarks in the papers of this juzʼ include scrollwork or shield with "FB" below (see p.306) and cross in circle with "BB" below (motif similar to Heawood 934) ; the second juzʼ is also comprised of several papers featuring variations on the crown-star-crescent watermark, three crescents (tre lune) and crown-star-three crescent watermark ; near the opening of this juzʼ, a well-burnished paper with crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.390, 39, etc., 70 mm. tall, single chain lines vertical spaced 30 mm. apart, roughly 6-7 laid lines per cm., compare Regourd, Catalogue cumulé des bibliothèques de manuscrits de Zabid, fascicule 1, no.147) and paper bearing the three crescents watermark (see p.490, 80 mm., chain lines vertical and spaced 28 mm. apart, roughly 7-8 laid lines per cm., somewhat similar to Heawood 865), toward the close, a paper with crown-star-three crescent watermark (see p.538, 558, etc., 80 mm. tall, single chain lines vertical and spaced roughly 20-23 mm. apart, roughly 9-10 laid lines per cm.), and paper with another crown-star-crescent watermark (see p.640, 70 mm. tall, single chain lines vertical and spaced roughly 28-30 mm. apart, roughly 6-7 laid lines per cm.) with countermark "HZ" (see p.594) and another paper with three crescents watermark (see p.650, compare Heawood 863, single chain lines vertical and spaced roughly 25 mm. apart, roughly 9 laid lines per cm.) with “FC” countermark (see p.652, compare Regourd nos. 137 and 138).', 'Decoration: Headings, words such as "قوله" linking the text and commentary, and some corrections rubricated (in matn and gloss) ; overlining in red ; red rule-borders throughout ; textual dividers in the form of red discs and black dot in circle with four red dots (compare types 2 and 19 in Regourd, Catalogue cumulé des bibliothèques de manuscrits de Zabid, fascicule 1).', 'Script: Naskh ; main text and gloss in two distinct hands ; main text in a neat Yemeni hand, partially but irregularly seriffed with occasional rightward or leftward serifs on assorted ascenders (even free standing alif), effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders (though somewhat stiff), lām seated on the baseline with stiff horizontal stroke, many open counters, pointing mainly in distinct dots, kāf mashqūqah (mashkūlah) preferred (shaqq even appearing on occasional final kāf), partially vocalized, headings/keywords supplied in larger, bolded script that is partially seriffed ; gloss in small, rounded Yemeni hand, serifless with a slight tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, some free assimilation of letters, open and closed counters, pointing in distinct dots, kāf mabsūṭah appearing often, miniature kāf seated in final kāf larger than expected, headings/keywords again supplied in larger, bolded script.', 'Layout: Written in 28 lines per page; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, (IV-4)+1 (5), I (7), 7 IV (63), II (67), 3 IV (91), III+1 (98), 10 IV (178), IV+1 (187), 6 IV (235), III+1 (242), 9 IV (314), III+1 (321), IV-2 (327), i ; chiefly quaternions ; middle four leaves of the first quire (foliated ۳ through ۶) have been removed and inserted as the binion which follows the ninth quire (inserted between fol.۶۴ and fol.۶۵) ; entire leaves bearing the gloss (but with portions left blank and unmarked) are inserted occasionally and not reckoned in the foliation (but are reckoned in the pagination) ; occasionally lacuna in the gloss of the margin are marked "بياض" ; middle-of-the-quire marks appear in the form of oblique dashes on the lower left corner of the left hand leaf ; catchwords are present for main text and occasionally gloss, though often difficult to see due to the tight binding ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, top outer corner of the recto of each leaf ; each juzʼ foliated separately ; foliation of second juzʼ mistakenly skips ١٣۴ ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (supplied during cataloguing).', 'Colophon: [al-Talwīḥ] "Scribal," triangular, reads: واتفق الفراغ من تحرير هذا الكتاب المبارك نهار الجمعة المباركة ثاني شهر شعبان الكريم احد شهور سنة تسعين والف والحمد لله الذي بنعمته تتم الصالحات وذلك بخط افقر العباد الى ربه يتولي امره وغفرانه محمد بن عبد الله بن صلاح بن عبد الخالق بن جحاف القاسمي غفر الله له ولامامه وللمسلمين امين امين [Ḥāshiyat Ḥasan Chalabī] "Scribal," triangular, reads: وكان الفراغ من رقم هذه الحواشي المباركة بعد العصر يوم السبت ليلة سابع شهر شوال الكريم الذي من شهور سنة تسعين والف سنة بخط الفقير الى كرم الله وعفوه الغني بالله عمن سواه الحسين بن احمد بن محمد بن احمد بن حشر غفر الله له ولوالديه وللمؤمنين والمؤمنات امين', 'Explicit: [al-Talwīḥ] لسلوك طريق الهدى انه ولي العصمة ومنه الهداية الى سوا الطريق و قد اتفق صبيحة يوم الاثنين التاسع والعشرين من ذي القعدة سنة ثمان وخمسين وسبعمائة فراغ بيان البيان ... والحمد لله على نعمه العظام ومنحه الجسام والصلوة على نبيه محمد واله واصحابه البررة الكرام وسلم عليهم [Ḥāshiyat Ḥasan Chalabī] لا يجور السقوط حرمة تركها في الجملة بالاعذار هذا اخر ما اردنا ايراده في حواشي الكتاب مستعينا بالملك الوهاب وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وسلم"', 'Incipit: [al-Talwīḥ] الحمد لله الذي احكم بكتابه اصول الشريعة ... وبعد فان علم الاصول الجامع بين المعقول والمنقول ... وان كتاب التنقيح مع شرحه ... ثم جمعت هذا الشرح الموسوم بالتلويح الى كشف حقائق التنقيح مشتملا على تقرير قواعد الفن ... قوله حامدا لله [Ḥāshiyat Ḥasan Chalabī] الحمد لله على شمول نعمه الجسام ... فشرعت في حواشي التلويح', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "al-Taftāzānī's commentary on al-Tawḍīḥ fī ḥall ghawāmiḍ al-Tanqīḥ, itself a commentary on Tanqīḥ al-uṣūl both by ʻUbayd Allāh ibn Masʻūd al-Maḥbūbī (d. 747/1346), on uṣūl al-fiqh. The text is arranged in two parts within the single volume, with table of contents for each. The complete text of Ḥasan ibn Muḥammad Shāh al-Fanārī's (d. 886/1481) gloss on al-Talwīḥ is provided in the margin by a different copyist."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 103', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.438, copied by Muḥammad ibn ʻAlī al-Kharyūtī [?]. Transcription finished ("tammat kitābat hādhihi al-nuskhah al-sharīfah...") in Qusṭanṭinīyah (Istanbul) toward the end of Rajab 1116 [November 1705].', 'Accompanying materials: Slips carrying notes (paginated pp.29-30, pp.113-114, pp.123-124).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 124. Commentary on legal work (al-Taudih?)."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in laid paper with red-brown leather on spine, fore-edge flap and edges/turn-ins ; Type II binding (with flap) ; envelope flap covered in marbled paper with floral designs ; board linings in laid paper ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations, rarely intact and nearly all quires are loose ; endbands virtually gone ; in poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather and fore-edge flap lining, envelope flap detaching from fore-edge flap, delamination of boards, etc. ; repairs in various leathers.', 'Support: European laid paper of mainly two types ; first type with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart (horizontal), horn in scrollwork watermark (compare Heawood 2680, etc.), burnished but not very smooth ; second type with 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 18-20 mm. apart (horizontal), as well as watermark with crown, a bar carrying initials "A G" and grapes, very well-burnished and fairly smooth.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and abbreviations rubricated ; occasional overlining in red ; written area (through p.67) surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Naskh ; neat, compact Ottoman hand ; virtually serifless ; slight effect of tilt to the left ; mainly closed counters ; pointing for two dots in the form of rounded inverted caret ; kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred.', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 2 V (20), I (22), 19 V(212), IV-1 (219) ; chiefly quinions ; final three leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (opening leaf carries ٦۱) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "وتمت كتابة هذه النسخة الشريفة على يد الضعيف محمد ابن الحاج علي الخريوتي في بلدة قسطنطنية في اواخر شهر رجب في سنة سبع عشرة ومائة والف والحمد لوليه والصلوة على نبيه واله تم"', 'Explicit: "لسلوك طريق الهدى انه ولي العصمة ومنه الهداية الى سواء الطريق وقد اتفق صبيحة يوم الثلثين من شهر مبارك الرمضان [كذا] سنة خمس وسبعين وثمانمائة [كذا] فراغ بنان البيان ... والحمد لله على نعمه العظام ومنحه الجسام والصلوة على نبيه محمد واله اصحابه البررة الكرام"', 'Incipit: "اذا استعملت في النكاح لان العوض يجب بنفسه فيصير بمنزلة هبة عين في يد الموهوب ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Acephalous copy of al-Taftāzānī’s commentary on al-Tawḍīḥ fī ḥall ghawāmiḍ al-Tanqīḥ, itself a commentary on Tanqīḥ al-uṣūl both by ʻUbayd Allāh ibn Masʻūd al-Maḥbūbī (d. 747/1346), on uṣūl al-fiqh. Discrepancy in the date within the explicit/authorial colophon may be attributed to scribal error.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 75', 'Origin: As appears in colophon p.714, copied by Muḥammad Yakan Muftīʻzādah (Mehmet Yeğen Muftizade). Transcription finished ("wa-qad waqaʻa al-farāgh ʻan taḥrīr hādhā al-kitāb...") mid-Ramaḍān 1223 [November 1808].', 'Accompanying materials: a. Detailed table of contents on unsewn quinion of European wove paper tucked inside upper cover (paginated pp.1-20) -- b. Single bifolium with gloss/excerpt (paginated pp.299-302).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 25. Commentary on Tankih al-usul."', 'Binding: Pasteboards now faced in marbled paper (blue, yellow, white, etc.) with spine, fore-edge flap, and edges/turn-ins dark brown leather (marbled paper faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures and doublure hinges in brown leather ; evidence of stamped mandorla under marbled paper facing on upper and lower covers ; decorative tooling on edges/turn-ins and fore-edge flap ; envelope flap in black leather with stamped and gold and red painted mandorla and cornerpieces, lined in marbled paper (blue, brown, yellow) ; sewn in yellow thread, two stations ; chevron endbands in dark brown/black and cream, in good condition ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, etc. ; several repairs.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10 laid lines per cm. and chain lines spaced 24 mm. apart ; watermarks include bird on pedestal with "C B" above and large lion passant ; some sections more heavily burnished than others and having a yellow-green tint.', 'Decoration: Keywords, section headings, and occasional notabilia rubricated ; overlining and textual dividers in the form of circles (resembling letter hāʼ or numeral khamsah ٥) in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Ottoman hand ; characteristically sans serif with effect of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 34 V(340), III (346) ; entirely quinions with final ternion ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "قد وقع الفراغ عن تحرير هذا الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب في اليوم الجمعة النصف من رمضان الشريف سنة ثلاث وعشرين بعد المائتين والف من يد الفقير اضعف عباد الله السيد الشيخ محمد المدرس العريف بيكن مفتى زاده احسن الله اليه ... والحمد لله رب العالمين"', 'Explicit: "لسلوك طريق الهدى انه ولي العصمة ومنه الهداية الى سواء الطريق و قد اتفق صبيحة يوم الاثنين التاسع والعشرين من ذي القعدة سنة ثمان وخمسين وسبعمائة فراغ بيان البيان ... والحمد لله على نعمة العظام ومنحة الجسام والصلوة على نبيه محمد صاحب الاعلام ... ما دامت الليالي والايام"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي احكم بكتابه اصول الشريعة الغراء... وبعد فان علم الاصول الجامع بين المعقول والمنقول ... ثم جمعت هذا الشرح الموسوم بالتلويح الى كشف حقائق التنقيح مشتملا على تقرير قواعد الفن ... قوله حامدا حال من المستكن ..."', 'Title from opening on pp.22-23.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of al-Taftāzānī’s commentary on al-Tawḍīḥ fī ḥall ghawāmiḍ al-Tanqīḥ, itself a commentary on Tanqīḥ al-uṣūl both by ʻUbayd Allāh ibn Masʻūd al-Maḥbūbī (d. 747/1346), on uṣūl al-fiqh.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 565', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.191, copied by Muḥammad al-Jabalāwī ibn Muḥammad al-Miṣrī while residing in al-Lādhiqīyah (Latakia) with transcription completed 2 Muḥarram 1084 [ca. 19 April 1673].', 'Accompanying materials: Acquisitions slip from Yahuda.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover and spine label "IL 61" (likely supplied by Yahuda see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in brown leather with dark red leather over spine ; Type II binding (once with flap, now lost) ; board linings (doublures) in comb marbled paper (in blue, red, white, etc.) ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla (filled with simply assymetric vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OAi) and pendants, as well as tooled border ; sewn in dull yellow thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in dull yellow and lime green, in poor condition with significant losses to headband ; overall in quite poor condition with loss of flap, significant abrasion, staining, delamination of boards (lower board almost fully delaminated several sheets in, only edge repair holds two sections together), pest damage, lifting and losses of leather, etc. ; repairs in dark red-brown leather (particularly to edges of lower board) ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10-11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced roughly 23 and 34 mm. apart (as though grouped in twos, horizontal) and coat of arms watermark with cross surmounted by crown and flanked by lions above two circles, "M B" in upper circle, nothing visible in lower (roughly 85 mm. tall, see pp.44-45, 64-65, etc. somewhat similar to Heawood 741) ; well-burnished, thin and crisp though sturdy, fairly translucent, dark cream in color ; staining and tide lines.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated.', "Script: Naskh ; small, compact 'Syrian' hand in a narrow line ; partially though irregularly serriffed (mainly on lām of definite article) with effect of tilt to the left and slight effect of words descending to basline, curvilinear descenders, pointing mainly in distinct dots, many closed counters, kāf mashqūqah preferred (even final kāf).", 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V-2 (8), 9 V(98) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in brown ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (skips two leaves each between pp.5-6 and pp.67-68).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "وقد وقع الفراغ من هذه النسخة الشريفة ضحوة يوم الجمعة ثاني شهر الله المحرم الحرام من شهور سنة اربع وثمانين والف من الهجرة النبوية على يد اضعف عباد الله ... محمد الجبلاوي نزيل ثغر اللاذقية بن المرحوم ... الشيخ محمد المصري ...[؟] غفر الله له ولوالديه تم"', 'Explicit: "ثم قسم الباقي على سهام من بقي منهم والله سبحانه وتعالى اعلم بالصواب والحمد لله فقد تم الكتاب ... وصلى على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه"', 'Incipit: " حمد لمن احكم احكام الشرع الشريف وأعلى مناره وأعز من قام باعبائه وأغلى مقادره ... وبعد فيقول الشيخ الامام ... شمس الدين محمد بن المرحوم شيخ الاسلام ... عبد الله ابن المرحوم شيخ الاسلام ... شهاب الدين احمد ابن تمرتاش الحنفي ... لما رأيت الهمم مائلة الى المختصرات المضبوطة راغبة عن الكتب المبسوطة اردت ان اكتب كتابا مشتملا على كثير من مسائل المتون المعتمدة محيطا بفوائد نفيسة عنها اكثر المختصرات ... وسميته بتنوير الابصار وجامع البحار ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1) and opening on p.2.", 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the compendium of Ḥanafī law by Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd Allāh al-Timirtāshī (d.1595). Followed by legal question posed to Abū al-Saʻūd (p.192). Volume likely once contained additional material though now lacking several quires from close.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 94', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.377, copied by Muḥammad ibn ʻUmar ibn al-Isbarī [?]. Transcription finished ("tamma tanmīq Tanwīr al-abṣār...") 20 Jumādá II 1203 [ca. 18 March 1789].', 'Accompanying materials: Slip with notes (paginated pp.107-108).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 3. Tanwir al-absar."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in deep red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in yellow laid paper, interior of fore-edge flap in red leather ; upper and lower covers carry blind-stamped mandorla (with floral vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OAi 4), pendants and roll-border in a series of s-shaped stamps framed by tooled fillets ; envelope flap carries blind-stamped pendant ; sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked endbands in pink and green, fair condition ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, staining, lifting and losses of leather (particularly fore-edge flap at lower cover), delamination of boards, spine slant (slightly cocked) etc.', 'Support: European laid paper of several types ; one type well-burnished with many inclusions visible, 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (horizontal), crown with beaded chain [?] watermark ; another type smoother, with fewer inclusions visible, 12 laid lines per cm. (vertical) and chain lines spaced 25 mm. apart (horizontal), and a type of coat of arms watermark ; yet another type with fewer inclusions, not as well-burnished, 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28-30 mm. apart (horizontal), and what appears to be fleur des lis with grapes watermark ; much staining, some leather burn.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.10, consisting of rectangular piece surmounted by scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) set in a well of orange-red and gold with black accents ; rectangular piece carries empty gold panel surrounded by border in yellow with black accents ; semi-circular piece (dome) carries crude floral vegetal design in red, white, and yellow on a field of gold ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by gold frame, elsewhere written area surrounded by red rule-border ; keywords, section headings, some notabilia, and abbreviation symbols rubricated throughout ; some overlining and textual dividers in the form of discs in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; bold Turkish hand ; mainly serifless though right-sloping head serif occasionally appears ; effect of tilt to left ; fairly rounded ; mainly closed counters.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, I+1 (3), 18 V(183), III (189) ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes front flyleaf and insert, mistakenly repeats pp.236-237).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم تنميق كتاب تنوير الابصار بعون الله الملك اللطيف المختار على يد افقر الكتاب واحقر الطلاب محمد بن عمر بن الاسبري عفى عنهما العفو العلي في اليوم العشرين من جمادى الاخرة لسنة ثلث ومائتين والف من الهجرة النبوية عليه افضل الصلاة واكمل التحية اللهم يسر لي العمل بما يحويه كما يسرت كتابته مع قراءته بحرمة حبيبك المصطفى ورسولك المجبتى وبحرمة جملة القرش والامين على وحي السماء امين تم"', 'Explicit: "ومن صالح من الورثة والغرماء على شيء منها طرح ثم قسم الباقي على سهام من بقي منهم والله سبحانه اعلم بالصواب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي أحكم أحكام الشرع الشريف وأعلى مناره وأعز من قام باعبائه وأغلى مقادره ... وبعد فيقول الواثق بمولاه محمد ابن عبد الله لما رأيت الهمم مائلة الى المختصرات المضبوطة راغبة عن الكتب المبسوطة اردت ان اكتب متنا مشتملا على كثير من مسائل المتون المعتمدة محيطا بفرائد نفيسة عنها اكثر المختصرات ... وسميته بتنوير الابصار وجامع البحار ..."', 'Title from inscription following table of contents (p.7) and in opening (p.10).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the compendium of Ḥanafī law by Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd Allāh al-Timirtāshī.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 340', 'Origin: According to colophon on p.503, supposedly copied by Muḥammad Masīḥ Shīrāzī with transcription completed 17 Muḥarram "٨٠۴" [ca. 27 August 1401], which seems impossible given Kalīm\'s dates ; 17 Muḥarram 1084 [i.e. ca. 4 May 1673] may have been intended. Ownership statement on \'title page\' (p.1) provides a terminus ante quem of 1684.', 'Former shelfmark: "121 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather seemingly covered with lacquer ; Type II binding (with flap) ; two-piece binding (overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; doublures in dark red leather gold-tooled with oval central ornament, crosses above and below, corner accents and border (all built up of small annular stamp) defined by gold rules ; upper and lower covers carry stamped central lozenge, pendants and cornerpieces (central lozenge and cornerpieces filled with composition of vegetal designs surrounding bird) painted red and bronze-gold and layered with lacquer, as well as border in gold-painted vegetal designs defined by gold fillets ; sewn in golden yellow and blue thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in golden yellow and blue thread ; overall in somewhat poor condition with envelope flap almost fully detached from fore edge flap (losses at joint), some lifting and losses of lacquer and leather, abrasion, losses and delamination of boards at edges, etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with roughly 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat indistinct) and irregular chain lines visible, dense and sturdy though thin, well-burnished, dark cream in color ; flyleaves in European laid paper ; extensive pest damage in final seven leaves ; flyleaves in European laid paper.', 'Decoration: Superb illuminated double-page opening on p.2-3 with headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by gold pendants surrounded by delicate floral vegetal decoration in orange, yellow, lavender, white, and red on a lapis and gold ground, surmounted by elongated scalloped dome filled with chi cloud and floral motifs in gold, orange, light blue, white, lavender, etc. surrounding pink pendants, all set in a well of now dark brownish blue with white accents flanked by narrow blue and gold bands ; marginal decoration of gold-painted plants and animals (lion, fox, rabbit, phoenix, antelope, etc.) completes the double-page illumination ; another exquisite illuminated headpiece at opening of ghazals on p.250 ; written area throughout surrounded by gold frame with blue outermost rule, divisions within defined by narrow gold bands ; text of written area of double page opening set off by gold cloud-bands, elsewhere flecked with gold ; gold-painted vegetal and animal decoration at close of some sections (see pp.249 and 491).', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand in a medium line, compactly filling the line ; characteristically serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, elongation of horizontal strokes, pointing in conjoined dots, point of final nūn set down in wide, slightly angled bowl.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page with written area often divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 9 IV(72), III (78), 9 IV(150), III (156), 6 IV(204), III+1 (211), 2 IV(227), IV+1 (236), 2 IV(252), i ; chiefly quaternions ; oblique catchwords on the verso of each leaf ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "بتاریخ هفدهم شهر محرم الحرام سنه ٨٠۴ سمت تحریر یافت علی ید الاحقر بل اللاشی محمد مسیح شیرازی م م م"', 'Explicit: " آرایش روزگار امروز ازوست بر روی زمانه زلف پر پیچ و خمیست"', 'Incipit: "ش\u200dوق\u200c ه\u200dر ک\u200dس\u200c را ک\u200dه\u200c در راه\u200c طل\u200dب\u200c س\u200dر م\u200dی\u200dده\u200dد گ\u200dر در آرد اول\u200c از پ\u200dا آخ\u200dرش\u200c پ\u200dرم\u200dی\u200dهد ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the collected poems of Kalīm Abū Ṭālib (d. 1651). Descriptive contributions from Nick Krabbenhoeft.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 934', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 83', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands " تنوير | الآفاق | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; compact hand in a medium line ; serifless and freely ligatured with slight effect of tilt to the right and of words descending to baseline, mainly closed counters, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 27 lines per page.', 'Collation: i,4 V(40), III (46), i (as suggested by quire numbering, sewing virtually impossible to examine) ; chiefly quinions ; quire numbering in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals accompanied by letter kāf (ك) appearing on the opening recto of each gathering from the second (see pp.21, 41, 61, 81) ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "ولم يظهر الجزع عليه وقال انني ما ولدت ولدا لا يموت وانما ولدت ولدا يموت هذا هذا [كذا] وحيث ذكرنا كثيرا من الامراض وذكرنا علاجاتها فليتسعن بهذا النموذج طالب الصحة والشفاء ... فانه سيجد شفاءها بالاستنباط مما ذكرناه والله يتولي هداه وليكن هذا آخر ما اوردنا تلخيصه من كتاب تهذيب الاخلاق وتطهير الاعراق للحكيم الفاضل ... احمد بن محمد بن مسكويه ... والسلام على من اتبع الهداية ففاز بالحسنى والدراية آمين ولنتبع ذلك برسالة الفوز الاصغر المعروفة النسبة الى المصنف"', 'Incipit: "نحمدك اللهم ولا نحصى ثناء عليك ونستغفرك ونسترضيك ونتوب اليك ... اما بعد فان الله تعالى بعد ان خلق الخلائق وذرأ البرايا اصطفى منها نوع الانسان وجبله من طين مؤلف من مختلف الاركان ... وكان مما ظفرت به يدي واسعدني به دهري كتاب تهذيب الاخلاق وتطهير الاعراق للحكيم الفاضل الفيلسوف الكامل الاستاذ الامام ابي علي احمد بن محمد بن يعقوب بن مسكويه ... فلهذا وذاك وجدتني نشطا الى تهذيبه وتلخيصه ... فما زلت اعاني النفس في ذلك ... فذلكة الكتاب والكتاب يشتمل على مقدمة ومقالات اربع ..."', "Title from inscription on 'title page' (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy of an anonymous abridgement of Abū ʻAlī Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad Miskawayh's (d. 1030) treatise on ethics, Tahdhīb al-akhlāq wa-taṭhīr al-aʻrāq ."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 77', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; very likely early 17th century as suggested by paper.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 76. Tanwir al-absar."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red brown leather (edges and turn-ins) and laid paper ; Type II binding (with flap) ; sewing in cream thread, two stations ; endbands lacking ; in poor condition with leather lifting from spine exposing spine lining ; much abrasion, staining, moisture and pest damage ; cover completely detached from textblock exposing sewing.', 'Support: European laid paper with laid lines running vertically, spaced roughly 8 laid lines per cm. and chain lines running horizontally, spaced roughly 29 mm. apart ; anchor watermark (in circle, single line, with trefoil above [?] ; compare Heawood 2 and 4) ; only lightly burnished ; much staining and water damage (tide lines) ; quires loose, care should be taken to avoid loss and damage.', 'Decoration: Textual dividers in the form of inverted commas ; text rubricated with keywords (قلت، فان قلت، الخ), overlining, textual dividers, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Turkish or Syrian hand (?) ; partially seriffed with right-sloping head serif on joined alif, lām ,etc. and sharp left-sloping head serif on alif of lām alif ligature ; the lām alif al-warrāqīyah preferred ; quite rounded ; freely ligatured ; slight effect of certain words descending to baseline, particularly words ending in descenders ; kāf mashkūlah preferred with bar of kāf often not fully joined to shaft ; mix of closed and open counters.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V+1 (11), 7 V(81), IV(89), 4 V(129), IV(137), 6 V(197), III (203) ; chiefly quinions ; initial leaf and final three leaves contains extratextual material on legal decisions, much in hand of copyist ; quire numbering, mainly black but occasionally red ink, in the form of Hindu-Arabic numerals appearing on the recto of the first folio of each quire ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization, mistakenly skips two pages (unmarked) between pp.99-100.', 'Explicit: "فبقيت اليمين فاذا تزوج بعد ذلك صحيحا وجد شرط حنثه وهو التزوج الصحيح فيحنث والله سبحانه وتعالى اعلم بالصواب واليه المرجع والماب وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه سلم تسليما كثيرا امين تم"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي أهل الفضلا لادراك المعاني ومعارف الاقطار ... وبعد فيقول الراجي عفو ربه الغافر الفقير شرف الدين بن عبد القادر الغزي الحنفي ... اذ عرض لي خاطر ان اضع عليه حاشية فاهتزيت لذلك كالروض للامطار وسارعت [كذا] في امتثاله ولا الما [كالماء؟] للقرار سميتها تنوير البصائر على الاشباه والنظائر..."', 'Title from opening on fol.2b (p.4).', 'Ms. codex.', "Neat copy of the gloss by Sharaf al-Dīn ibn ʻAbd al-Qādir al-Ghazzī (d.1005/1596) on Ibn Nujaym's treatise on Ḥanafī law."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 834', 'Origin: Pertains to the Jalālī year 1235 [1856-1857] suggesting a date of transcription around this time ; watermarks consistent with such a dating. Illuminated heading on opening horiscope suggests transcription in Istanbul.', 'Binding: Limp cover in heavy coated and textured paper, surface-dyed a pale yellow and embossed with pattern of plumes, scrolls, and floral motifs ; sewn in spring green and dark blue thread, six stations, through paper cover ; overall in fair condition with staining and abrasion ; housed in envelope.', 'Support: European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of lion rampant guardant (see p.2, 8, 28, etc.) and initials "NR" in arms (see p.4, 6, 26, etc.) very similar to Eineder no.1018 dated 1806 but with "NR" rather than "AB" ; creamy buff in color (yellowish hue), crisp and well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Written area and tables throughout defined by gold bands and black lines ; heading of opening horiscope diagram chrysographed "لع يل ١٢٧٢ سال عالم بأفق دار السلطنه العلية العثمانيه" ; many headings and keywords / symbols rubricated.', 'Script: Mainly naskh and naskh with elements of ruqʻah ; clear Turkish hands ; elegant naskh employed for most headings, some entries and some annotations ; more compact naskh with elements of ruqʻah used for other annotations and some headings ; forms resembling siyakat letterforms used in table entries ; elucidation of symbols employed entered on opening page (p.1) above and alongside the horiscope diagram.', 'Layout: Written area divided to accommodate tables of 14 columns and 16 rows (with 15 of the rows carrying two lines each corresponding to the days of the month), headed by outlines of square charts divided to 12 (4 central squares and 8 triangles corresponding to the celestial houses) ; prickings for ruling the tables evident in the outer and lower margins.', 'Collation: VII (14) ; single septenion ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Careful copy of an astronomical almanac (natījah / rūznāmah / ephemeris) for the Jalālī year 1235 (indicated as the 778th, see p.2) preceded by horiscope (ṭāliʻ) for the year (given in the corresponding Hijrī / Rūmī value, 1272, see p.1). Presumably observed at Istanbul. Corresponding Hijrī, Rūmī, old Yazdagardī and Coptic calendars dates are given. Contributions to the cataloguing from Elizabeth Kunze.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1051', "Origin: As appears in colophon at close on p.630, Tarih-i Fezleke copied by Muṣṭafá ibn Ḥasan, known as Miftāḥīzādah (Miftahizade Mustafa b. Hasan) with transcription completed in Dār al-Salṭanah al-Qusṭanṭanīyah (Istanbul) mid-Ṣafar 1117 [June 1705]. As appears in colophon at close on margins of p.313 (fol.١٤٩ a) , Tuhfetü'l-kibar also copied by Miftahizade Mustafa b. Hasan with transcription completed in Istanbul end of Dhū al-Qaʻdah 1117 [March 1706]. Transcript of Mizanü'l-hak ends abruptly and lacks colophon (see p.388), though hand suggests that it was also entered by Miftahizade Mustafa b. Hasan, likely just after the transcription of Tuhfetü'l-kibar.", 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (once with flap, though now lost) ; board linings in mint green, gold- and silver-flecked paper, made endpapers / flyleaves in marbled paper (chiefly in red, green and blue) ; upper and lower covers carry stamped (recessed onlays), gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, symmetrical but without chi clouds) and pendants, as well as tooled and gold-painted cornerpieces and chain borders (series of s-shaped stamps) ; edges of text block tinted yellow ; primaries sewn through textile spine lining, reversed leather glued on top, lapped upon lower cover ; sewn in dark rose thread, four stations ; worked chevron endbands in red and sage green ; overall in fair condition with flap lost, boards delaminating, lifting and losses of leather, minor pest damage, etc. ; subtle repairs at board edges (tail and head).', 'Support: European laid paper with roughly 12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 26 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of three hats or caps (tre cappelli, see pp.16, 22, 32, 40, 622, etc.), cream in color, quite sturdy, extremely well-burnished to glossy ; some cockling, minor moisture damage toward close of codex ; added table of contents on another European paper of "raisin" type with roughly 12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 22-24 mm. apart (vertical) and watermarks of names (see p.6, etc.) and grapes (raisin) with crown and name "A. GALLIARD [?]" above (see p.2, 8, etc.).', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening of text (on p.14, following added table of contents), consisting of rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying section heading in red "في سنة الف" flanked by swirling floral motifs on dark blue (reminiscent of lapis) and gold grounds, surmounted by a scalloped w-shaped piece with swirling floral vegetal motifs in shades of pink, light blue, orange, red and yellow on grounds of gold and dark blue, all set in a well of heavy gold interlace, narrow gold bands and bands of blue and red with white crosses and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in dark blue with red accents ; incipit and facing pages surrounded by heavy gold frame defined by narrower gold band, black fillets and outermost red fillet, elsewhere written area surrounded by narrower gold frame defined by black fillets ; headings and keywords rubricated ; some overlining of other keywords in red ; textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Ottoman hand in a medium line ; characteristically serifless with effect of words gently descending to baseline, some elongation of horizontal strokes, some sweeping descenders, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, final and free-standing nūn with an angled bowl, not exceptionally wide with point nearly assimilated.', 'Layout: Written in 31 lines per page ; additional texts glossed in margins in varying number of lines on the diagonal on certain pages ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, III (6), 31 V (316), i ; exclusively quinions with ternion for added table of contents for entire codex ; final leaf left blank ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; foliation in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, distinct for each of the two texts glossed on the margins ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: [Tarih-i Fezleke] "Scribal," triangular, reads "تم هذا الكتاب المستطاب بعون الله الملك القديم الوهاب على يد اضعف العباد مصطفى بن حسن الشهير بمفتاحى زاده فى بلدۀ دار السلطنة القسطنطنية فى اواسط شهر صفر الخير لسنه سبع عشره ومايه والف م" ; [Tuhfetü\'l-kibar] "Scribal," reads "تم هذا الكتاب بعون الله الملك القديم الوهاب على يد اضعف العباد مصطفى بن حسن الشهير بمفتاحى زاده فى بلدۀ دار السلطنة القسطنطنية فى اواخر شهر ذالقعدۀ شريفه لسنه سبع عشره ومايه والف"', 'Explicit: [Tarih-i Fezleke] "مقدما حسن اغايه حيله ايدن حلواجى محمد قونيه ده قتل واخذ اولمغين" ; [Tuhfetü\'l-kibar] "برر برر اجرا ايلمك اسبابه بولندن مباشرتك شرطى در الله تعالى ميسر ايليه امين" ; [Mizanü\'l-hak] "وبو كه كشف الظنون عن اسامى الكتب والفنون نامى قونلوب سابقا مسوده سن"', 'Incipit: [Tarih-i Fezleke] "سنۀ مزبوره محرمنك غره سى كه يوم السبت در هجرت نبويه نك اوجيوز اللى درت بيك درتيوز طقسان طقوزنجى كونى اولوب ..." ; [Tuhfetü\'l-kibar] "ابتداء تاريخ تحفة الكبار سرنامۀ داتسان جهان ستان حمد وسپاس خداوند زمين وزمان اولمق ...وبعد چون تاريخ هجرة نبويه بيك اللى بش ساله ايروب كلام معجز اثار نبويه ما صدقى اولان فتوحاة اسلاميه دن كريد فتحى ظهور ايلدى ... اسمنه تحفة الكبار فى اسفار البحار ديدى ..." ; [Mizanü\'l-hak] "الحمد لله الذي جعل العقل حجة في خلقه وايد الشرع به فيما يفرق بين الباطل وحقه ... وبعد اول آفرينش دن برو ميان ارباب دانشده عقل ايله نقل توامان ومعقول ومنقول فرسى رهان ايدوكى ... اكا بناء نزاع اولنان مسئله ده طريق برهانى بيان ايچون برايكى سطر تسويد اولنوب ميزان الحق فى اختيار الاحق دينلدى ..."', "Title supplied by cataloguer from edge title and inscription on 'title page' for added table of contents (p.1).", 'Ms. codex.', "6. p.314-p.388 (margins) : Mizanü'l-hak fî ihtiyari'l-ahak / Kâtip Çelebi.", "5. p.65-p.313 (margins) : Tuhfetü'l-kibar fi esfari'l-bihar / Kâtip Çelebi.", "4. p.64 (margins) : Fihris-i Kitab-i Tuhfetü'l-kibar.", '3. p.62-p.63 (margins) : [four signed favorable blurbs (taqrīẓ)].', '2. p.13-p.630 : Tarih-i Fezleke / Kâtip Çelebi.', '1. p.1-p.12 : [table of contents].', "Elegant volume carrying three works by the renowned Ottoman scholar Kâtip Çelebi (d.1657), preceded by a table of contents for all three. In the main written area appears his Tarih-i Fezleke, a chronicle of Ottoman history addressing the years 1000 to 1065 (1591 to 1654-5). Two additional works are glossed with deliberate placement on the margins: first his Tuhfetü'l-kibar fi esfari'l-bihar, a history of Ottoman naval engagements through 1067 (1656) preceded by four signed favorable blurbs (taqrīẓ) and contents listing (fihris) and finally Mizanü'l-hak fî ihtiyari'l-ahak, his final work, addressing controversial questions of doctrine or practice with proposed solutions and concluding with an autobiographical account of his life and works (this copy incomplete)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 382', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.625, copied by ʻAbd Allāh al-Shahrī [?] ibn Muḥammad (Abdullah eş-Şehri bin Mehmet) with transcription completed 2 [?] Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1181 [ca. 20 April 1768].', 'Former shelfmark: "457 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on \'title page\' (p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in dark maroon and framed in dark brown leather (extending to edges/turn-ins, leather faced and edged framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap), two-piece binding (seam of overlapping flanges visible at spine) ; board linings (doublures) in elegant marbled paper (in black, blue, dark green and red) ; upper and lower covers carry lozenge-shaped central ornament and pendants filled with gold-tooled or incised and gold-filled vegetal composition on dark brown recessed onlays, along with tooled borders in gold ; now sewn in white thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and light blue, good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with some abrasion, staining, lifting of leather, spine slant (slightly cocked), etc. ; repairs to flap in red leather, small repair at head of fore edge flap in red leather, spine rebacked in red leather, and hinges rehinged.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (mainly vertical, somewhat distinct, curved) and irregular, single chain lines occasionally visible (mainly horizontal), cloudy formation, sturdy, beige in color, well-burnished ; some staining ; small repairs (fills).', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.2, consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral motifs in gold with red and green accents, surmounted by scalloped w-shaped piece filled with swirling floral vegetal composition mainly in gold, with red, green, and pink accents on fields of gold and dark blue, itself surmounted by elaborate vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue, entire piece set in a well consisting of bands of pink with red accents, light blue with dark blue accents, and gold interlace ; another illuminated headpiece (dome) at opening of second section on p.294 ; written area surrounded by heavy gold frame defined by black fillets, divisions within (poetic passages, etc.) defined by narrow gold bands outlined by black fillets ; section headings and keywords rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear, compact Turkish hand ; partially but irregularly serifed with small teardrop head-serifs on occasional ascender (lām, ṭāʼ even alif) , slight effect of tilt to the left, many closed counters, pointing (for two and three dots) in conjoined dots or strokes, free assimilation of letters.', 'Layout: Written in 25 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 31 V(310), II (314) ; almost exclusively quinions followed by a binion ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, often cut off ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads "قد وقع الفراغ عن يد الضعيف عبد الله الشهرى بن محمد غفر الله ذنوبهما ولجميع المؤمنين والمؤمنات لسنه ۱۱۸۱ ذا الحجه فى يوم ٢ [؟] تم"', 'Explicit: "وهدايت صمدانيه سن بدرقۀ طريق ايليه آمين بحرمة الانبياء والمرسلين والحمد لله على الاتمام والصلوة والسلام على نبيۀ سيد الانام وعلى اله واصحابه الكرام ومن تبعهم باحسان الى يوم القيام"', 'Incipit: "يا رب بو رياض ايچره زلال كرمكله بو تازه قلم اشلمه سن بارور ايله"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of the official Ottoman history covering the years 1157-1165 (1744-1752) composed by official historiographer (vak'anüvîs / vakanüvîs), Süleymân İzzî (d.1755)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 925', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and eventually bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 74', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "تاريخ باكس | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Lined / ruled wove paper.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; compact hand in a thin to medium line (line thickness changes) ; serifless and freely ligatured with slight effect of inclination to the right and of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 26-28 lines per page.', 'Collation: Some leaves between sections left blank (see pp.182-183, 234) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "في شكل حضور اجتماعي متحد يدخل تحته حضور العضوي الى الفرد الجزئي"', 'Incipit: "في موضوع الفلسفة وفي اخذ الاسم ادواراشتي [؟] قد لا يكون من الحكمة والسداد في شيء ان نظير البيان في هذا المجمل ..."', 'Title from inscription at opening (p.1).', 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy of what appears to be an Arabic rendering of Ernest Belfort Bax's (1854-1926) Handbook on the history of philosophy, followed by an addendum on Neo-Hegelianism (see p.354 to close)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 35', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.294a (p.596), copied by Ibrāhīm ibn al-Ḥājī Ramaḍān. Transcription finished ("qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min taḥrīr hādhihi al-nuskhah al-sharīfah...") Muḥarram 1117 [April-May 1705].', 'Accompanying materials: Numerous inserts carrying extensions of the glosses (paginated pp.9-10, 15-16, 23-24, 35-36, 41-42, 45-46, 61-62, 231-232, 349-350), often sewn or tipped in.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 111. Al-Tarikat al-muhammadiyah."', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in marbled paper (in blue, yellow, pink, white) with spine, fore-edge flap, and edges/turn-ins in dark brown (to black) leather (marbled paper faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in paper ; some red leather on flap ; marbled paper has been placed over blind stamped design (central lozenge with vegetal pattern) ; sewn in white thread, two stations, with primaries in dark blue thread ; fine worked chevron endbands in red and yellow ; in poor condition with much abrasion, staining, cracking and splitting of leather at joints, etc. ; upper board nearly detached and corners exposed and delaminating ; lower board cracked ; envelope flap is entirely gone and fore-flap is detaching from lower cover ; housed in box for protection.', 'Support: European laid paper with roughly 11 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines (horizontal) spaced 23-25 mm. apart ; watermarks include coat of arms with cross flanked by griffins, crown above and two circles below, upper with "A G R", lower with "I" (compare Heawood 755).', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with abbreviation symbols, overlining, keywords, section headings, etc. in red ; textual dividers in the form of red discs, three inverted commas, etc.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Turkish hand ; virtually serifless, but occasional right-sloping head-serif on lām, etc. even free-standing alif ; effect of slant to the left ; mainly closed counters ; hand may change where line thickness changes (pp.351-526) but a very similar Turkish naskh.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling-board clearly evident), both central area and margins.', 'Collation: VI (12), 9 V(102), IV+1(111), 2 V(131), IV (139), 3 V(169), III (175), 7 V(245), VI (257), V (267), VI (279), V (279), IV (297) ; chiefly quinions ; first three leaves and final three leaves left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts, skips two pages each between pp.3-4, 57-58 and 139-140, mistakenly repeats p.557 twice).', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, reads: "قد وقع الفراغ من تحرير هذه النسخة الشريفة المسماة بطريقة المحمدية والسيرة الاحمدية لمولانا البركوي محمد افندي تغمده الله مغفرانه واسكنه بحبوحة جنانه من يد الحقير المذنب المحتاج الى رحمة الجليل ابراهيم ابن الحاجي رمضان يوم الثلث قبل الظهر من شهر المحرم في سنة سبع عشر ومائة والف والحمد لله والصلوة والسلام على محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين م م م"', 'Explicit: "وجلاء القلوب فعليك بها وطالعها حتى تعلم حقيقة مقالنا وقول الحمد لله الذي هدينا وما كنا نهتدي لو لا ان هدينا الله ربنا لا تزغ قلوبنا بعد اذ هديتنا وهب لنا من لدنك رحمة انك انت الوهاب"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي جعلنا امة وسطا خير امم ... وبعد فان العقل والنقل يتوافقان والكتاب والسنة يتطابقان ... فاردت ان اصنف الطريقة المحمدية واحببت ان ابين السيرة الاحمدية حتى يعرض عليها عمله كل سالك ..."', 'Title from colophon on fol.294a (p.596).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Neat, well-glossed copy of the sermons and homilies of Birgivî (Birkawī, Birgilī) Mehmet Efendi.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 447', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; decoration, paper, etc. would suggest 16th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "576 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on verso of front flyleaf ; "123" inscribed in pencil on \'title page’ (p.1).', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in blue cut velvet with red leather over spine and edges / turn-ins (velvet faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in dark yellow surface-dyed gold-flecked laid paper ; sewn in pink thread, four stations ; overall in fair condition with some abrasion and lifting of leather, text block fully detached from cover.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persianate) laid paper with 8-9 laid lines per cm. (vertical, somewhat distinct) and occasional pairs of chain lines (see p.6), sturdy, well-burnished (burnisher\'s marks visible), dark cream to beige in color ; flyleaves in European laid paper with watermarks "GHIGLIOTTI" (outer front flyleaf), shield with crown above and likely lion rampant within (front inner flyleaf), and eagle with wings spread (back inner flyleaf).', 'Decoration: Elegant illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening (p.2) of rectangular piece with cartouche in gold carrying title in white ترجمۀ چهل حديث accented by swirling vegetal pattern reminiscent of arabesque in pink, light blue, gold, red, orange, and white on fields of blue and gold ; surmounting the rectangular piece, a scalloped semi-circular piece (dome) set against another rectangular piece (both filled with similar vegetal pattern to that seen in lower piece) is itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue ; written area of incipit page surrounded by frame consisting of gold and green bands with outermost blue fillet ; elsewhere writen area surrounded by frame consisting of a narrow gold bank outlined in black with outermost blue fillet ; preface and text of elucidation/paraphrase chrysographed ; ḥadīth text in blue.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless with characteristic descent of words to baseline and superscripting of final words and letters ; elongation of horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in roughly 9 lines per page, three of ḥadīth text and six of Chagatai elucidation with two of these divided to hemistiches and arranged on the diagonal ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, IV+1 (9), ii ; a composed anomalous quaternion formed of two joined single leaves, two whole bifolia, and a single leaf joined to a whole bifolium.', 'Explicit: "تمت ترجمه هذه الاربعين اى كه شخصينگى خالق فتاح ... كه بو نوع ايكى اربعين موجود بولسه شايد كه تاپقاسين مقصود يتسه مقصود مدعا بيرلا منى ياد ايتكاسين دعا بيرلا كه نواييغه اول دعا يتكاى بلبل روحىغه نواييتكاى"', 'Incipit: "صحیح ترین حدیثی که راویان مجالس دین ... این چهل کلمه است ازان کلمات فهم و حفظ را بر نظم ترکی ترجمه گر ده می آید امید ... لا يؤمن احدكم حتى يحب لاخيه ما يحب لنفسه مؤمن اير ماستور وركه ايماندين روزگاريده يوز صفا كورگاى..."', 'Title from headpiece at opening (fol.1b).', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Mir Ali Şîr Nevâî's [Navāʼī] Chagatai Turkish verse paraphrase of Jāmī's rendering of forty ḥadīth, with Persian preface, Arabic ḥadīth text, and Chagatai elucidation."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 372', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.60, transcription [and composition?] completed in Dhū al-Qaʻdah 1021 [December 1612 or January 1613].', 'Former shelfmark: "377 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on recto of front flyleaf ; "٥" on spine label.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures also in a dark red leather with elegant gold-tooled central ornament of interlace, roughly diamond shaped with pendants, along with gold-tooled border ; hinges now in purple, gold-flecked paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped and gold-painted mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OAi) with pendants and tooled border (also in gold) ; sewn in dark blue thread, two stations ; in fair condition with lifting and losses of leather (particularly at upper board), delamination of boards, staining, etc. ; repairs to spine, fore edge flap, board edges, etc. in black and red leathers.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal or vertical, fairly indistinct) and rare chain lines visible, sturdy and well-burnished, medium cream in color ; many of the bifolia guarded ; flyleaves in European laid paper with 9 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 27 mm. apart (vertical) and watermark of figure holding scepter (other hand at waist), sturdy and well-burnished to glossy.', 'Decoration: Exquisite illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.4 consisting of large, wide rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by gold pendants overlaid with delicate gold arabesques incorporating chi clouds and floral accents (in white, pink, red, light blue, turquoise, etc.) on grounds of blue (cobalt) and gold, surmounted by a wide, scalloped w-shaped piece filled with similar arabesques and floral motifs on grounds of gold and blue, all set in a well / bordered in narrow bands of light blue with dark blue crosses and dark pink with red crosses flanking a band of heavy gold interlace ; written area throughout surrounded by gold frame ; textual dividers in the form of inverted commas in red ; occasional keywords and headings rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; exquisite hand in a medium line ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, elongation and contrasting thickness of horizontal strokes, pointing mainly in conjoined or distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 3 V(30), i ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present but often obscured ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Colophon: "Scribal [?]", triangular, reads, "تمت الرساله بعون الله تعالى فى سنه احدى وعشرين والف فى شهر ذى القعده"', 'Explicit: "اى برادر عاشق بونك چاره سى بر شيخ مرشد صحبتنده والمقدر هج مكسه صحبتندن محروم كتدوكى يوقدر مكر كه بيكده برى اوله ان شاء الله تعالى"', 'Incipit: "سنريهم آياتنا فى الآفاق وفى انفسهم حتى يتبين لهم انه الحق بل و اكآه اولكم آفاقده نشانلر واردر سنك نفسكده داخى واردر پس هر كمسه كه عالمك نشانلرن كندو نفسنده بولدى اللهى بلدى ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of a brief treatise on Ṣufism.'])

en: (count: ['Origin: As appears in colophon at close (p.325), transcription completed mid-Shawwāl 733 [ca. June 1333] by Aḥmad ibn ʻAlī ibn Aḥmad al-Kūfī al-Hamadānī, likely the scholar who reportedly was born in 1281 in Kūfah, became an established scholar in Iraq, and eventually traveled to Damascus where he also taught in several madrasas before he died in 1354 (cf. GAL S II 211 / 2a, also father of Ibn al-Faṣīḥ al-Kūfī, d. 1344).', 'Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 1059', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in a mottled paper (cream and dark red) with spine and trace of fore edge flap in brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, now lost) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in pale yellow paper ; sewn in cream threads, two stations ; traces of worked chevron endbands in light pink and pale yellow, warp threads (primaries) apparently stitched through leather spine lining ; overall in fair condition with strong attachment, some losses of leather and paper, abrasion, etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper, mainly with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, see p.12, 284 etc.) and chain lines difficult to observe but occasionally visible in pairs (see p.264, 12-14 mm. between chains), sturdy, dense and somewhat thick, furnish fairly cloudy, some knots and clumps of fiber visible, only lightly burnished ; flyleaves in European laid paper with six-pointed star watermark visible (perhaps over anchor).', 'Decoration: Keywords and headings rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; careful and delicate hand in a thin line ; virtually serifless with tall, straight ascenders and mainly curvilinear descenders (some sweeping), tail of rāʼ and wāw quite short, foot of lām flattened and parallel to baseline, kāf mashqūqah preferred with often long shaqq on even final kāf, bowl of nūn occasionally tall and narrow occasionally broad and shallow, final hāh often as short stroke (closed counter), pointing in distinct dots, occasionally positioned on the diagonal ; rubricated headings in a larger hand reminiscent of tawqīʻ, seriffed with sharp right-sloping strokes on lām, free-standing alif, etc.', 'Layout: Written in 13 lines per page (single column) ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board quite evident).', 'Collation: i, III (6), IV+1 (15), 18 IV(159), II (163), i ; almost exclusively quaternions ; catchwords present ; foliation in pencil, Hindu-Arabic numerals, lower outer corner of recto ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," rectangular, reads: "تم كتاب تسهيل الفوائد وتكميل المقاصد في منتصف شوال من سنه ثلاث وثلثين وسبعمائة كتبه احمد بن على بن احمد الكوفى الهمدانى حامدا مصليا مسلما متع الله من كتبه له به وبسائر العلوم وبلغه اماله ويقبل اعماله وجمع شمله وليسبغ عليه فضله"', 'Explicit: "وزيدت ياء في بأييد ومن نباي المرسلين وملايه وملايهم وهذا مما ينقاد اليه ولا يقاس عليه "', 'Incipit: "قال الشيخ الامام العلامة الأوحد شيخ النحاة والادباء جمال الدين ابو عبد الله محمد بن عبد الله بن مالك الطاءى الاندلسى الجياني رحمه الله حامدا لله رب العالمين ومصليا على محمد خاتم النبيين وعلى آله وصحابته اجمعين هذا كتاب فى النحو جعلته بعون الله مستوفيا لاصوله مستوليا على ابوابه وفصوله فسميته لذلك تسهيل الفوائد وتكميل المقاصد ..."', 'Title from opening matter on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine early copy of Ibn Mālik's renowned treatise on grammar."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 339', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, decoration, etc. would suggest 18th or early 19th century. Flyleaves likely early 19th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Blank scrap of paper paginated pp.287-288.', 'Former shelfmark: "115 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" on upper board lining.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark red leather ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in yellow-tinted laid paper, flyleaves in lavender surface-dyed, gold-flecked laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry stamped (with recessed onlays, now gone to green and white) four-lobed central ornament evoking two intersecting lozenges or lozenge with two domes radiating from it (filled with vegetal composition having large floral motifs) and pendants, as well as tooled border in blind rules and a series of s-shaped stamps ; sewn in blue-green thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and pink, good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with some abrasion and staining, lifting of leather, minor delamination of boards, etc. ; repair to spine (rebacked) in similar red leather.', 'Support: non-European (likely Persian or Indian) laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical, fairly distinct) and occasional pairs of chain lines visible, sturdy, well-burnished, dark cream to beige in color ; endpapers in European laid paper ; minor staining and tide lines ; added flyleaves in European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 25-26 mm. apart (vertical), and watermarks of "ALMASSO" and scrollwork with eagle above horse "GAM" below.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān / sarlawḥ) at opening on p.8, consisting of narrow rectangular piece carrying the basmalah flanked by floral accents, surmounted by a larger rectangular piece with gold cartouche carrying the title in red ink ("ديوان كليم عليه الرحمة") flanked by floral motifs mainly in white and gold with red and blue accents on fields of gold, blue and red, itself surmounted by a scalloped w-shaped piece (central dome flanked by two partially visible domes) filled with swirling floral vegetal composition in green, white, pink, yellow, orange, blue and red on fields of gold and blue, all surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in blue and set in a well of blue and red bands with white accents ; another fine doublue-page illumination (headpiece along with cloudbands in written areas) at opening on pp.158-159 ; written area (central panel, columns within, and ruled margins) of incipit and facing page surrounded by gold frame and red rule-border with text set off by gold cloud-bands, elsewhere only gold frame appears ; keywords and section headings rubricated.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq ; elegant hand ; serifless, with effect of words descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', "Layout: Written in roughly 43 'lines' per page, 17 in the central written area and as many as 26 on the diagonal in the margins ; central written area mainly divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.", 'Collation: iii, 22 IV(176), II-1 (179), iii ; almost exclusively quaternions ; middle of the quire marks in the form of ٢ at a slight angle in the outer margin of the lefthand leaf ; catchwords present ; page between sections (p.157) left blank ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and blank insert).', 'Incipit: "شوق هر کس را که در راه طلب سر میدهد گر در آرد اول از پا آخرش پر میدهد .."', 'Title from illuminated headpiece at opening on p.8.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the Dīvān of Kalīm Abū Ṭālib (d. 1651).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 472', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.336, copied by al-Sayyid Ḥāfiẓ Aḥmad (Hafız Ahmet) with transcription completed 1 Jumādá I 1169 [ca. 2 February 1756] in Edirne.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label, "IL 48" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in marbled paper (in yellow, pink and dark brown, see envelope flap) with dark red leather over fore edge flap and edges/turn-ins (likely spine as well, but now covered in cream textile) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in peach / light orange wove paper ; sewn in dark green-blue thread, two stations ; worked endbands in dark green-blue and cream, damage with losses and exposed core ; overall in somewhat poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, spine slant (cocked) etc. ; repairs in cloth.', 'Support: European laid paper with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 21-22 mm. apart (vertical), and watermarks including crown above name and grapes, others more difficult to observe (see p.12, 13, 32, 33, 38, 112, 113, etc.), thin and transluscent though sturdy, quite well burnished to glossy ; some foxing and staining.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings rubricated (text to be entered in red indicated in margin, see p.31, though often cut off) ; textual dividers in the form of red discs ; written area surrounded by red rule-border.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Turkish hand ; partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on occasional lām of definite article and free-standing alif, effect of tilt to the left, rounded with curvilinear descenders, pointing (two and three dots) mainly in conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Written in 15 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: V+1 (11), 16 V(171), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular reads "تمت بعون الله الملك الوالي [؟] والحمد لله رب العالمين حرره السيد حافظ احمد في مدينۀ ادرنه غره في جمادى الاول سنه ١١٦٩"', 'Explicit: "هذا عظيم الشأنى هذا رسول البارى هذا خاتم الرسلى يا رب صل على جميع الرسلى والهم والصحبى مازينت بالنجمى واشرقت بالفجوى وضوات بالشمس في يومنا والغدوى الى انتهاء الامرى"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله ذي النعم المتواترة والفضل الجزيل ... وبعد فيقول محمد بن احمد العوفي في ذي العجز والنقص ... هذا مختصر في القرآات العشرة المتواترة باقوى حجة ... وسميته التسهيل وشفاء العليل لطالب جد مجد في الرحيل ..."', 'Title from opening matter (preface) on p.4.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of a work on Qurʼānic readings (qirāʼāt) by Mehmet b. Ahmet el-Avfî (d.1639 or 40). Preceded and followed by notes and excerpts in Turkish and Arabic.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 132', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper suggests late 17th century or early 18th century.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 97. Commentary on Alfiyah."', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in combed marbled paper (see envelope flap) with red leather over spine, fore-edge flap, and edges/turn-ins (marbled paper faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid paper ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked endbands in red, blue and cream, fair condition ; overall in poor condition with significant abrasion, lifting and losses of paper and leather, delamination of boards, staining, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 10-11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal) and chain lines spaced 28 mm. apart ; well-sized and burnished ; watermarks include three hats (compare Heawood 2599), crown with other motifs, scrollwork ; some staining.', 'Decoration: Key words, text being commented upon (matn), and abbreviation symbols rubricated ; occasional textual dividers in the form of red discs.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Turkish hand ; serifless ; effect of slight tilt to the left ; many open counters ; kāf mashkūlah (mashqūqah) preferred ; pointing in distinct dots ; many tapered descenders ; partially vocalized (text of matn).', 'Layout: Written in 27 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, VI+1 (13), 17 VI(217), VI+1 (230), i ; chiefly sexternions ; catchwords present ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes back flyleaf and skips two pages between pp.361-362).', 'Explicit: "فاحمد الله مصليا على محمد خير نبي ارسلا واله العزاء الكرام البرره وصحبه المنتخبين الخيره نجز [؟] بحمد الله وعونه وحسن توفيقه وصلى الله على اشرف الخلق سيدنا محمد واله وصحبه وسلم تسليما كثيرا والحمد لله رب العالمين', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله والشكر له وصلوته على اشرف نبي ارسله ... وبعد فهذا توضيح لمقاصد الفية بن مالك رحمة الله [كذا] يجلوا معانيها على طلابها ويظهر محاسنها لخطابها ..."', 'Title from opening on p.4.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of the commentary by Badr al-Dīn Ḥasan ibn Umm Qāsim al-Murādī on Ibn Mālik's (d. 672/1273) al-Alfīyah, or al-Khulāṣh fī al-naḥw. Table of contents precedes text."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 76', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon but paper would suggest 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: Two small slips with excerpts in black ink (paginated pp.67-68 and pp.69-70).', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 40. Commentary on Usul al-fikh."', 'Binding: Pasteboards faced in block-printed paper (floral design, for best view see envelope flap) with spine and edges/turn-ins in red brown leather (paper faced, leather edged, framed binding) ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in laid European paper ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; endbands nearly gone, only core and primaries remain ; in poor condition with much abrasion, staining, cracking and lifting of leather along fore-edge flap ; boards delaminating ; minor pest damage.', 'Support: European laid paper, a few types ; quires bearing text in perhaps two papers, watermarks present but difficult to examine, laid lines vertical with roughly 10 laid lines per cm., chain lines spaced roughly 26-28 mm. apart ; blank quires in still a different European paper with watermark lion rampant in shield/scrollwork with crown above and "F C A" below, 22-23 mm. between horizontal chain lines, laid lines spaced roughly 13 per cm., highly burnished and medium thickness ; fourth to final quire (single bifolium) bears watermark "FIN DE ... 1742" comparable to Heawood 3265.', 'Decoration: Text rubricated with keywords, overlining, etc. in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant Ottoman hand ; characteristically serifless with effect of gentle slant to the left, slight effect of words descending to baseline, contrasting thickness in horizontal strokes compared to vertical, initial hāʼ looking like to two inverted commas, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: V (10), V+1 (21), 3 V(51), IV (59), 6 V(119), I (121), V (131), VI (143), III-1 (148) ; chiefly quinions ; text ends in fifth quire from end with final leaves of that quire ruled but left blank ; final four quires also blank ; final word of the last line of each verso repeated at the beginning of the top line of the recto of the following leaf ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes inserts).', 'Explicit: "فالخليل لما خاف الاشتباه والتلبيس على القوم انتقل الى ملة اخرى لا يكون فيها اشتباه اصلا والثالث كقولنا"', 'Incipit: "حامدا لله تعالى اولا وثانيا ولعنان الثناء اليه ثانيا وعلى افضل رسله مصليا وفي حيلته الصلوات مجليا ومصليا وبعد فان العبد المتوسل الى الله تعالى باقوى الذريعة عبيد الله بن مسعود بن تاج الشريعة سعد جده وانجح جده يقول لما وقفني الله تعالى بتاليف تنقيح الاصول اردت ان اشرح مشكلاته وافتح مغلقاته ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', '2. fol.116b-fol.148b : [blank].', '1. fol.1b-fol.116a : al-Tawḍīḥ [incomplete].', "Fine copy of the author's commentary on his Tanqīḥ al-Uṣūl, on the principles of jurisprudence. Incomplete ; ends abruptly with final quires left blank."])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Grapes with cartouche and crown; initials AG in roman.', 'Contains tables and diagrams.', "End date based on owner's mark on p. [1].", 'For another copy of this text, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 740. For the Muqniʻ itself, see Mich. Isl. Ms. 795,11.', 'Commentary by the author on "a poem on the methods of timekeeping used by Abū Miqraʻ." David A. King, A Survey of the Scientific Manuscripts in the Egyptian National Library (Winona Lake, 1986), p. 143.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 930', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974).', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 79', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "التعليم الانتقادي | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Ruled / lined wove paper of two types.', 'Script: Ruqʻah ; quick, compact hand in a thin to medium line (line thickness changes) ; serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of inclination to the left and of words descending to baseline, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 26-29 lines per page.', 'Collation: Pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "لا يقال فيه ان لا يسع نفسه ... والله يقول الحق وهو يهدي السبيل"', 'Incipit: "ان القضية التي تضمنت المسائل العظام المنطوية تحت نظرية العلم والتي لمست اساس الحضور والحقيقة وعرضت نفسها على كنت من جديد بوسيلة قراءته ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from heading at opening on p.1.', 'Ms. codex.', '2. p.29-p.171 : [extracts from Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam with commentary] / Ibn al-ʻArabī.', '1. p.1-p.28 : [work on the philosophy of Immanuel Kant opening with "al-Taʻlīm al-intiqādī"].', "Careful copy of a work on the philosophy of Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) addressing education, ethics, practical reason, history, etc. followed by what appears to be extracts from Ibn ʻArabī's (d.1240) Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam with commentary (anonymous and presumably that of ʻAbd al-Razzāq al-Qāshānī, d.1330?, see p.98)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 87', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.475, composition finished 1st of Muḥarram 995 [ca. 12 December 1586]. This copy prepared by Muṣṭafá ibn Aḥmad, with transcription ("istinsākh") finished in the middle of Dhū al-Qaʻdah 1024 [November 1615].', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 46. Durar al-hukkam."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in light brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now missing) ; doublures of fine combed marbled paper in pink, orange, blue and white ; upper and lower covers bear blind-stamped central mandorla with design comprable to Déroche class. OSv 1 and simple tooled rule border ; label on upper cover has only been partially removed ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; endbands in blue and yellow (?) nearly lost ; in fair condition with flap missing, much abrasion and staining, and losses to endbands.', 'Support: European laid paper with laid lines running vertically spaced roughly 10 laid lines per cm. and chain lines running horizontally spaced 29 mm. apart ; lightly sized and burnished ; watermarks include anchor in circle with trefoil above (compare Heawood 2), crown with 6-pointed star above (similar to Heawood 1131), and "BG" with trefoil above countermark ; quire beginning at p.357 appears to be on a thinner European laid paper with crossbow in circle watermark.', 'Decoration: Textual dividers in the form of inverted commas ; text rubricated with keywords (اما بعد، قوله، الخ), section headings, overlining, textual dividers, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Turkish hand ; highly seriffed with right-sloping wedge-shaped head serif on nearly every shaft ; highly ligatured ; slight effect of tilt to the left ; often strong effect of descenders slanting sharply down to the left and of words descending to baseline (see p.306-316, p.323-33, etc.) though varies ; kāf mashkūlah preferred (even final kāf) ; line thickness and tendency to slant, descent to baseline, etc. vary but appears to have been supplied by the same copyist throughout.', 'Layout: Written mainly in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, VI(12), 22 V(232), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (final count off by 12 pages - skips 234 and from 249 to 258).', 'Dedication: Composed by al-Wānī for his son, Pīr Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Wānī (see opening on fol.4b/p.10).', 'Colophon: "Authorial" followed by "scribal," triangular, reads: "هذا اخر ما يسر الله تعالى بلطفه الرباني لاضعف عباده محمد الواني قول [؟] من التعليقات المتعلقة بدرر الحكام في شرح غرر الاحكام الواقع في غرة شهر محرم الحرام من شور سنة خمس وتسعين وتسعمائة في الهجرة النبوية المصطفوية والحمد لله سبحانه اولا واخرا والصلوة على نبيه محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين واستنسخه[؟] الفقير الى الله المتين مصطفى بن احمد غفر الله لهما ولوالديهما لجميع المؤمنين والمؤمنات افاض الله انارة البر [؟] ومد الله ظله الظليل علينا في اواسط شهر ذي القعدة الشريفة سنة اربع وعشرين والف', 'Explicit: "ان يكون الموصي كما المشتري منه [؟] بالنظر الى الموصي له فان الاقالة بيع حتى الثالث"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة على سيد المرسلين محمد واله وصحبه اجمعين اما بعد فقد قال صاحب الدرر في صدر كتابه او الاستعانة ... [al-Wānī ʻalá al-Durar] الحمد لوليه والصلوة على نبيه اما بعد فلما قراى علي الولد الاعز اعنى به موهبة [؟] الله تعالى من لطفه الرباني پير محمد بن محمد الواني كتاب الدرر والغرر درسا فدرسا حررت ما لاح في قلبي وجال في خلدي شيئا فشيئا ..."', 'Title from colophon on p.475.', 'Ms. codex.', '4. fol.232b : [blank].', '3. fol.4b-fol.232a : al-Taʻlīqāt al-mutaʻallaqah bi-Durar al-ḥukkām fī sharḥ Ghurar al-aḥkām / Muḥammad ibn Muṣṭafá al-Wānī, al-shahīr bi-Wānqūlī.', '2. fol.4a : [blank].', '1. fol.1b-fol.3b : [opening passage on the preface of the Durar, etc.].', 'Fine copy of the gloss (possibly also entitled Naqd al-Durar) by Vankuli Mehmet Efendi (Muḥammad ibn Muṣṭafá al-Wānī, al-shahīr bi-Wānqūlī, d.1000/1592) on the Durar al-ḥukkām, the commentary by Molla Hüsrev (Muḥammad ibn Farāmurz, d.885/1480) on his Ghurar al-aḥkām, on principles of legal practice. Preceded by a brief passage discussing topics from the preface of the Durar, Hāshiyat al-Jurjānī ʻalá al-Kashshāf, etc.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 820', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.326, copied by Osman Zeki (ʻUthmān Zakī) with transcription completed 18 Dhū al-Ḥijjah 1279 [ca. 6 June 1863]. As appears in preceding authorial colophon (also on p.326) composition completed 1180 [1766 or 7].', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in bright yellow surface-dyed coated paper ; upper and lower covers carry tooled and gold-painted border and corner accents ; sewn in red thread, two stations, many broken ; overall in fair condition with minor abrasion, staining, detached at spine (bulk of the textblock is loose), etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 13 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 22 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of an eagle (p.12, etc.) and lion in shield / arms (see p.10, etc.), beige in color, sturdy though crisp, heavily burnished.', 'Decoration: Most keywords and headings rubricated, others in blue ink ; written area of incipit and facing page (pp.14-15) surrounded by a series of red and blue rules, elsewhere written area surrounded by red rule-border ; numerous line diagrams and tables mainly in red ink (see p.45, 48, 49, 52, 151-2, 179, 184-6, 191, 267-8, 275, 311, and 325) ; overlining in red.', 'Script: Nastaʻlīq (talik) ; elegant hand ; serifless, with slight effect of words inclining to the right and descending to baseline, closed counters, and elongated horizontal strokes.', 'Layout: Written in 23 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, III (6), 16 V(166), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; final three leaves ruled but left blank ; pagination in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (begins at opening of table of contents) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (referenced in cataloguing).', "Dedication: As appears in opening matter on p.15 (and in added 'title page' inscription preceding table of contents on p.1), translation executed for Sultan Mustafa III (r.1757-1774).", 'Colophon: "Authorial," reads "بو تاريخ تمام ترجمه ١١٨٠" ; "Scribal," triangular, reads "حرره الفقير السيد عثمان زكى من تلاميذ بكرى عبد الرحمن افندى غفر عنه البار سنه تاسع وسبعين ومائتين والف شهر ذى الحجه يوم ثامن عشر تمت كتاب"', 'Explicit: "درجه ودقيقه سنده واقع اولمشدر پس عون عنايت ربانى وتوفيق سعادت رفيق سبحانى ايله بو تحفۀ شريفك ترجمه سى رسيده حسن ختام اولمغله تبركا تيمنا در حال اخذ ارتفاع النوب زائچۀ اتمام كشيده وتسطيره قلندى الحمد لله على الاتمام والصلوة والسلام على خير الانام واله وصحبه الكرام ايليه رب الانام بادشهى مستدام كلدى بو تاريخ تمام ترجمه ١١٨٠"', 'Incipit: "حمد سپاس بيحد وقياس اول مالك الملك على الاطلاق وفياض كلشن سراى انفس وافاق تعالى شانه عن الفهم والادراك ... پس ذكراتى تحفۀ لطيف نك مؤلفى اولان نهال حديقۀ علم وعرفان وثمره شجره واتقان وعليشاه ابن قاسم خوارزمى رحمة الله عليه علم حساب ونجومده ممتاز الامثال اولمغله ... فن مذبورده مفصل ومشروح بر نسخۀ بينظر جمع وتعبيه واشجار واثمار اسميله تسميه ايدوب ... ایچون لسان تركى اوزره ترجمه سنه بو عبد العزيز كم بضاعه يى مأمور بيورملريله ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Fine copy of Subhizade Hekîmbaşı Abdülaziz Efendî's (d.1783) Turkish rendering of the astrological treatise, Ashjār va as̲mār or S̲amarah-i shajarah-i nujūm, by ʻAlāʼ al-Dīn ʻAlī Shāh ibn Muḥammad ibn Qāsim al-Khuvārizmī al-Bukhārī. Table of contents at opening (pp.2-11)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 425', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on p.345, copied by Hacı Süleyman ( الحاج سليمان / al-Ḥājj Sulaymān ) with transcription completed 8 Ṣafar 1188 [April 1774]. As appears in preceding authorial colophon on pp.344-345, composition completed 2 Ṣafar 1094 [January 1683].', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures red-brown leather, lower hinge in block-printed paper (floral motifs in blue, red and yellow) ; upper and lower covers carry stamped (gold-painted recessed onlays) central lozenge-shaped ornament (filled with symmetrical vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. NSd 5) and pendants, along with gold-painted accents and tooled border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; doublures carry gold-flecked outline of exterior ornament ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in cream (or pale yellow) and dark brown, fairly good condition ; overall in fair condition with some lifting and losses of leather, abrasion, staining, spine slant (slightly cocked), etc.', 'Support: non-European laid paper with 7-8 laid lines per cm. (horizontal, somewhat distinct, curved) and occasional chain lines faintly visible, cloudy formation, crisp and transluscent though sturdy, well-burnished to glossy, beige in color ; flyleaves in pale lavender, silver-flecked European paper (with three hats / tre cappelli watermark).', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.4, consisting of rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral accents in pink and gold, surmounted by scalloped w-shaped piece with swirling floral motifs (in pink and gold), surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) with floral motifs in red and gold, all set in a well of gold bands ; written area of incipit and facing page surrounded by frame consisting of gold bands and black and red fillets ; elsewhere written area surrounded by red-rule border ; textual dividers in the form of gold and red discs ; keywords rubricated.', 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand ; partially seriffed with right-sloping head-serif mainly on lām, effect of tilt to the left, mainly open counters, curvilinear descenders, pointing in conjoined dots.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, 16 V(160), VI+1 (173), i ; almost exclusively quinions with a final senion ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals (includes inner flyleaf at opening).', 'Dedication: As appears in opening matter on p.5, likely composed for the grand vezir Merzifonlu Kara Mustafa Paşa (d.1683).', 'Colophon: "Authorial," reads "بو نسخۀ زينا وترجمۀ رعنا [؟] قلم مترجم عبد فقير ايله بيك طقسان درت صفر الخيرينك ايكنجى سبت كونى تمام اولدى وانا الفقير المعترف بالعجز والتقصير الى رحمه مولاه الغنى القدير محمد بن محمد الشهير بردوسى زاده بعونه تعالى" ; "Scribal," triangular, reads "بو كتاب عنبرين نقابك كتابتى نسخۀ مؤلفدن تحرير اولديغى نى محرر مذكور اشارت ايتمكله صحيح نسخه اولمغه بو نبذۀ پر تقصير الحاج سليمان اشبو كتاب مستطابى تكميل ايدرمكى منظورى اولان مؤمنين بو فقيرى ومترجم ... دعا ايله يادايده لر تم في ۸ ص سنه ١١٨٨"', 'Explicit: "ايدر كه ذكر اوتان روايت بو يايده اولان مسموعا نمرك الله اعلم احسنيدر احسنى لفظى ايله ترجمه پايانه ايردى فلله الحمد والمنه ... بو نسخۀ ..."', 'Incipit: "حمد بى غايه وثناى بى نهايه اول ذات بيچونه اولسونكه احكام شرع قويمى محكم كتابى ايله ... مترجم كتاب عنبرين نقاب محمد بن محمد الشهير برودوسى زاده ايدركه چونكه دستور اسمان بايه وصاحب خورشيد سايه مسند فروزكار فرمانى ... اعنى وزير مصطفى پاشا دام غروفشا ... بر نيچه اموردن استفسار ايلدكده اما رحمه الله تعالى حالاميان علماده خراج ابى يوسف عنوانيله معروف ومشهور اولان كتابى تأليف بيورمشلر ايدى ديوب كتاب مذكور محاسننى شرح وبيان ايلمشدى ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer.', 'Ms. codex.', "Elegant copy of the Turkish rendering by Rodosîzade Mehmet bin Mehmet (d.1701) of Abū Yūsuf's (d.798) treatise on the kharāj, or land tax, written for Hārūn al-Rashīd (ca. 763-809)."])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 825', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; circumstances of composition, paper, etc. suggest late 19th century (see p.88 in Walz, "The paper trade of Egypt and the Sudan in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries").', "Binding: Boards faced in a streaked or veined paper resembling effect of tree marbling (tree calf, marble calf, marbled leather), mainly in dark blue, with printed 'waste' visible beneath and red leather over spine ; Type III binding (without flap) ; board linings in untinted paper ; paper labels on spine ; sewn in white thread, four stations ; overall in quite poor condition with much abrasion, staining, losses of paper and board, lifting of leather, detached at spine, etc.", 'Support: European laid paper with 8 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 30 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of crescent (with human profile) in shield (see p.10, 11, etc.) and "Andrea Galvani" (see p.6, etc. and compare nos.1159 and 1161 dated 1871 and 1874 respectively in Nikolaev, Watermarks of the Ottoman Empire, vol.1 as well as p.89 in Walz, "The paper trade of Egypt and the Sudan in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries"), cream in color, quite thick and well-burnished ; minor pest damage, some moisture damage (tide lines and staining).', 'Decoration: Keywords, table headings and numerals rubricated ; written area surrounded by red rule-border, table divisions also in red rules.', 'Script: Naskh approaching ruqʻah ; clear, compact Egyptian [?] hand ; serifless with slight effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, pointing in distinct dots, some free assimilation of letters.', 'Layout: Opening matter (pp.2-4) mainly in 28 and 31 lines per page, followed by several pages of sample calculations (pp.4-9), then the tables of varying dimensions.', 'Collation: 3 V(30) ; exclusively quinions ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "محفوظ زحل ... مح مشترى ... مح مريخ ... محفوظ زهره ... محفوظ عطارد ... تم بعناية الله وتوفيقه"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي خلق العرش والكرسى والاكوان والصلاة والسلام على النبى المبعوث في اخر الزمان ... اما بعد عرفاى اولى الابصار ذوى الاستبصاره معلوم اوله كه علم حساب علوم جزئيه نك اشرفى اولمغله عند المحاسبين مشهور ومتعارف اولان رصد جديد قسينى نك زبان افرنجيدن لسان تركى يه ترجمه سنه فضيلتلو خليفه زاده اسماعيل افندى موفق الوب لكن بو انه قدر تسهيلنه ... بو قليل البضاعه طوراق باشا زاده مير ابراهيم الاستانبولى جعل الله التقوى زاده نك ..."', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from opening matter on p.2.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the set of astronomical tables for the period beginning with the opening of the year 1237 [September 1821] and concluding with Shawwāl 1240 [May-June 1825] (see opening matter on p.2) and covering a large geographical area, executed by Durak Paşazade Mir İbrahim el-İstanbulî from the translation from French to Turkish by Halîfezâde İsmail Çınarî of the tables by César-François Cassini de Thury (d.1784).'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 672', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. suggest 18th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From inner front cover and spine label "IL 67" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in dark brown leather ; Type II binding (with flap, though now lost) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in pink surface-dyed laid paper ; upper and lower covers carry large stamped (with orange recessed onlays) and gold-painted scalloped mandorla (filled with vegetal composition, compare Déroche class. OAi type) and pendants with gold-painted strokes and rosette stamp accents , along with gold-painted border in a series of s-shaped stamps flanked by gold fillets ; sewn in dark blue or black and dark pink thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in pink and yellow, some damage ; overall in fair condition with loss of flap, some abrasion and staining, textile (likely linen) repair to spine, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper ; mainly with 11 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 22-25 mm. apart (vertical), and watermarks of grapes (raisin) with crown above (p.68, etc.) and names with date (possibly 1756 [?], see p.69, etc.), medium cream in color, thin and crisp though sturdy, well-burnished to glossy ; another type with 12 laid lines per cm. (horizontal), chain lines spaced 22 mm. apart (vertical), and watermark of scrollwork with lion and "F A" below (see p.624, etc.).', "Decoration: Splendid illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) at opening on p.2 consisting of narrow rectangular piece carrying the basmalah flanked by gilt swirling vegetal pattern surmounted by larger rectangular piece with empty gold cartouche flanked by floral accents (in white, red and gold on fields of red and blue) surmounted by a remarkable w-shaped piece filled with swirling floral vegetal decoration in white, green, red, and black on a gold ground along with inset dome carrying painting depicting the Prophet's mosque at Medina (al-Masjid al-Nabawī) in white, blue, and grey on a pink ground with sky and mountain in background (in shades of blue and grey) ; w-shaped piece flanked by vegetal pieces in blue and orange-red and surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) in a dark pink and blue ; entire headpiece set into a series of elaborate well borders consisting of a colored band (blue, light pink, dark yellow, dark pink to red, and green) with a series of crosses in a contrasting color ; written area surrounded by gold frame ; textual dividers in the form of gold and red discs ; keywords and text being commented upon overlined in red.", 'Script: Naskh ; elegant Ottoman hand ; partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on occasional lām, effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders.', 'Layout: Written in 31 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: 35 V(350), III (356) ; almost exclusively quinions ; fol.119b (p.236) and fol.120a (p.237) left blank (perhaps intended for some never-completed depiction of the tombs of the Prophet, Abū Bakr and ʻUmar) ; foliation in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals (mistakenly begins anew on p.239 after lacunae) ; quire numbering in red ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals, appears often on the verso of the final leaf of the quire ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (mistakenly skips two pages between p.3 and p.4 and drops ten pages followed p.679 with p.670).', 'Colophon: " تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب استانبولده يكى والده سلطان جامع شريفنده پنچره ديبنده امت محمد وعظ نصيحت ايدن محدث مفسر شيخ اعمى داود زاده محمد افندى مرحومك تاليف ايلدوكى دلائل الخيرات شرحيدر كتابك اسمى بودر كتاب توفيق موفق الخيرات لنيل البركات في خدمت منبع السعادات ديو تسميه اولنمشدر رضاء الله فاتحه"', 'Explicit: "رب العالمين اويله الله عظيم الشانكه جمله عالم لرك [عالملرك] موجودى ومربيسى ومالك متصرفيدر"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله الذي صلى بنفسه على النبي عليه اكمل الصلوة والتسليم ... اما بعد حق سبحانه وتعالى حضرتلرى نوع انسانى جملدن مكرم وعقل فهم ادراكى تفهيم وعلمله جملدن ومفخم قره ودرياده بعيديرلره كتمده كندينى واحمال كتورمكه بنكلر احسانيله معظم وانواع طيبات ومستلذات انعاملريله متنعم قلديغنه سر حكمت كندويى توحيد واصناف عبادت ايله قوللق اولدغنى ... بو كتابه توفيق موفق الخيرات لنيل البركات في خذمت منبع السعادات ديو تسميه اولندى ..."', 'Title from opening (recto of leaf carrying p.4) and colophon (p.699).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Elegant copy of the commentary by Kara Davutzade Rumi Mehmet b. Ahmet Efendi (d.1756) upon Dalāʼil al-khayrāt, al-Jazūlī’s (d.1465) celebrated collection of prayers for the Prophet.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 291', 'Origin: Date, copyist and place of transcription are not specified in colophon of fol.360a (p.720 ; paper and hand would suggest a dating of 16th to early-mid 17th century.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black leather (pebbled quality of shagreen) with edges/turn-ins and spine in tan leather (sheep) ; Type III binding (without flap) ; doublures in red leather (sheep) with filigree in gold leather over red and blue paper and green silk ; upper and lower covers bear central scalloped mandorla with floral vegetal pattern (compare Déroche class. OAi2 7), pendants and corner pieces (in complementary floral vegetal pattern) along with tooled border consisting of a series of s-shaped stamps framed by scored fillets ; doublures bear scalloped mandorla, pendants and corner pieces with vegetal pattern in elaborate gold leather filigree applique over red and blue paper and green silk along with gold painted accents and rule border ; fine chevron endbands in blue-green and purple ; sewing mainly in same blue-green or blue (middle quires) with two sewing stations ; a few early quires sewn in white with two stations ; primaries in same blue-green ; in quite fair condition with some abrasion and edge wear, staining, minor pest damage, some lifting and losses of leather and paper (covers and filigree of doublures), and loose quires.', "Support: non-European (Persian, 16th or early 17th century - prior to 1650 [?]) laid paper with fairly distinct laid lines running horizontally spaced roughly 8-9 laid lines per cm., some curving/sagging ; virtually no chain lines visible, though sporadically a single chain line is visible ; some undissolved fibers; thick ; crisp ; highly burnished with some burnisher's marks ; some pigment breakthrough along central frame of fol.1 ; some page repairs in same paper as flyleaves (apparently added later as evidenced by the traces of the doublure filigree design on fol.1a and fol.360b ; burn on fore edge of textblock ; some accretions, soiling, staining, etc.", 'Decoration: Superbly executed illuminated headpiece (ʻunwān) appears at the opening of each main section (see fol.1b/p.2, fol.183b/p.366, fol.280b/p.560, and fol.325b/p.650), each includes a cartouch bearing the work or section title ; elaborate frame consisting of bands of green, red, light blue, gold, blue and red with black fillets appears throughout ; incipit and facing page (as well as opening and facing page for each of other main sections) bear additional blue band with white crosses around written area and dividing the columns of the written area a band in lapis lazuli with floral pattern in gold ; written area throughout is gold-flecked ; cloud bands with floral vegetal pattern in green, blue and red appear on incipit and facing page (as well as on opening and facing page for each of the other main sections) ; margins (even inner margin) of incipit and facing page bear elaborate design of flowers, vines and birds in gold (as does opening and facing page for third main section - see p.560-561) ; opening and facing pages for second main section (see p.366-367) bears essentially the same design but with what appears to be faces of lions rather than birds ; opening and facing pages for final main section bear similar design with large blossoms rather than animal motifs ; text rubricated with section headings, etc. in red.', 'Script: Nastaliq ; fine Persian hand ; sans serif with characteristic sloping of words to baseline, final words or letters of each line superscript, closed counters, and characteristic letterforms.', 'Layout: Written in 21 lines per page ; written area divided to two columns ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, IV+1 (9), 34 V (349), IV (357), I+1 (360), i ; chiefly quinions ; catchwords present, though occasionally lost to trimming ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during cataloguing.', 'Colophon: "Scribal," triangular, chiefly in Arabic, reads: "تمت الكتاب بعون الله الملك الوهاب تمام شد كليات افصح المتكلمين كمال الدين اسمعيل اصفهانى عليه الرحمه تم تم تم"', 'Explicit: "جوياى كمالند بجان اهل هنر انگاه بجان كمال جوينده ست"', 'Incipit: "اى صفات تو بيانهار ازبان انداخته عزت ذاتت يقين را در كمان انداخته"', 'Title from cartouche in ʻunwān on fol.1b (p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', '4. fol.325b-360a : رباعيات خلاق المعانى كمال الدين اصفهانى غفر الله ذنوبه', '3. fol.280b-325a : غزليات كمال الدين اسماعيل', '2. fol.183b-fol.280a : مقطعات خلاق المعانى كمال الدين اسماعيل', '1. fol.1b-fol.183a : القصايد والمراثى من كلام افصح الفصحا كمال الدين اسمعيل اصفهانى', 'Exquisite copy of the collected poems of the noted panegyrist, Kamāl al-Dīn Ismāʻīl known as Khallāq al-Maʻānī, including qaṣāʼid, marās̲ī, muqaṭṭaʻāt, ghazalīyāt and rubāʻīyāt.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 394', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper, etc. would suggest early 19th century.', 'Former shelfmark: "495 T. De M. [i.e. Tammaro De Marinis]" inscribed in pencil on interior of upper cover.', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in red leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; board linings in pale pink laid paper, flyleaves surface-dyed mint green ; upper and lower covers carry tooled and gold-painted corner accents (mainly rosettes) and border (guilloché roll flanked by gold fillets) ; design continues on envelope flap ; sewn in cream thread, two stations ; worked chevron endbands in yellow and brown, fairly good condition ; overall in fairly good condition with minor staining, etc.', 'Support: European laid paper with 6-7 laid lines per cm. (vertical), chain lines spaced 29-30 mm. apart (horizontal), and watermarks of three stylized top hats with feathers (see p.6, 10, 170, etc. and compare Heawood 2594, Venice 1831 and Eineder 709, Venice 1814) and "C + B" (see p. 2, 168, etc.), quite sturdy and well-burnished, cream in color ; minor foxing.', 'Decoration: Illuminated headpiece at opening on p.2, consisting of rectangular piece carrying the basmalah surmounted by scalloped dome filled with floral vegetal design in gold, itself surmounted by vertical stalks (tīgh) also in gold with entire piece set in a well of gold ; written area surrounded by gold frame defined by black fillets ; keywords (including catchwords) and section headings rubricated ; textual dividers in the form of gold discs.', 'Script: Naskh ; clear Turkish hand ; partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serifs on occasional lām, effect of tilt to the left, curvilinear descenders, mainly open counters, pointing (for two and three dots) in strokes rather than distinct dots.', 'Layout: Written in 17 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: i, 8 V(80), III (86), i ; almost exclusively quinions ; catchwords present (rubricated) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization.', 'Explicit: "شاعر شرمى جلبى ميدان اشمش راميلردن اولوب جكدوكى مرتبه رميه قادراتجى ايدى رحمه الله عليه نقاش زاده اسمعيل تازه نوجوان اولوب تيراندازيره مسلم وممتاز ايدى خاتمة رساله"', 'Incipit: "الحمد لله رب العالمين والصلوة والسلام على سيدنا محمد الذى فضل الرمى على سائر الاسلحة اجمعين وامر بالرمى لكل كبير وصغير من المؤمنين ... وبعد بو فقير پر تقصير عبد الله الكاتب بجامع مرحومه ومغفور بها والده سلطان طاب ثراها بو رسالۀ سكزباب اوزره تزيين وتنميق ايليوب تذكرۀ رمات تسميه ايلدم ..."', 'Title from opening matter (p.2).', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of the work on archery by Abdullah el-Kâtip (of the Valide Sultan Camii) with descriptions of archery grounds in Istanbul, Edirne, Bursa, etc. as well as biographical notices for distinguished archers.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 575', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; paper and hand suggest 13th or 14th century.', 'Accompanying materials: a. Acquisitions slip from Yahuda -- b. Inventory cataloguing slip in hand of Winifred Smeaton Thomas.', 'Former shelfmark: From interior of upper cover "IL 220" (likely supplied by Yahuda, see acquisitions slip).', 'Binding: Boards covered in purple and black mottled paper (sponge painted or faux marbled look) with dark blue-green cloth over spine and fore edge flap ; Type II binding (with flap) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in brown wove paper ; resewn in yellow and cream thread, six stations ; worked chevron endbands (likely not original but with rebind) in yellow and blue ; overall in fair condition with some lifting and losses of paper, delamination of boards at corners, spine slant (slightly cocked), etc.', 'Support: non-European (likely Arab) laid paper with roughly 6 laid lines per cm. (vertical, curved and quite distinct, 20 in 33 mm.) and chain lines barely visible (horizontal) though possibly grouped in twos (or twos and threes) with 7-8 mm. between chains and 39-44 mm. between groups (see pp.70-71, 122, etc.) ; rib shadows also visible ; thick and fairly sturdy, lightly burnished, worn and soft, dark cream in color with inclusions and indissolved fibers ; ink burn and some pest damage.', 'Decoration: Keywords and section headings heavily bolded.', "Script: Naskh ; mainly a large 'Syrian' or Egyptian hand in a bold line ; mainly serifless (though very slight right-sloping head-serifs appear on occasional alif and initial lām) with curvilinear descenders, open and closed counters, the lām alif al-warrāqīyah preferred, bar (shaqq) of kāf occasionally left off, some elongation of horizontal strokes, freely ligatured and only casually pointed in distinct dots ; opening quire (and recto of opening leaf of second, i.e. through p.21) supplied in a similar though different hand in a thinner line.", 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled.', 'Collation: ii, V-2 (8), 16 V(168), IV-1 (175), ii ; almost exclusively quinions ; opening quire (in a different hand) lacks catchwords, elsewhere catchwords present ; mid-quire marks in the form of ٢ in upper outer margin of the right-hand leaf and lower outer margin of the left-hand leaf ; quire numbering in the form of whole words with catch title ("الثاني") from the third quire on, in the upper outer corner of the recto of the opening leaf of each quire ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves).', 'Explicit: "على مواضع التحقيق والاستعار بان مثل هذا علن [؟] ان يقال والله اعلم"', 'Incipit: "تشمل ما تقدم [؟] ايضا وقول ا مع مراحيه [؟] عنه احتراز من قوله افعل ولا تفعل ..."', 'Title from tail edge.', 'Ms. codex.', 'Fine copy of an odd second volume of a commentary (possibly of Ḥusām al-Dīn Abī al-Faḍl Muḥammad al-Nūrī, see GAL, S I, p.921) on al-Muntakhab fī al-uṣūl min al-Maḥṣūl of Fakhr al-Dīn al-Rāzī (d.1209) (compare the ms. in Dār al-Kutub al-Ẓāhirīyah, no.2811), opening in al-Faṣl al-sādis (presumably on al-nāsikh wa-al-mansūkh) and closing in al-Faṣl al-thālith ʻashar fī-mā ikhtalafa fīhi al-mujtahidūn.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 34', 'Origin: As appears in colophon on fol.123a (p.251) and fol.176b (p.358) copied by Muḥammad Naqī ibn Muẓaffar ʻAlī Parchvānī ʻAlīyānī from the environs of Jūldar (Joldar). Transcription of Thawāb al-aʻmāl finished 28 Jumādá I 1109 [ca. 12 December 1697] ; transcription of ʻAqāb al-aʻmāl finished 21 Rajab 1109 [ca. 2 February 1698].', 'Accompanying materials: Slip with excerpt in black ink tipped in following fol.35 (p.74) and paginated as pp.75-76.', 'Former shelfmark: British Museum, London "No. 115. Bayan thawab kalimat al-tauhid."', 'Binding: Pasteboards covered in black (or very dark brown) leather ; Type II binding (with flap) ; doublures and interior of fore-edge and envelope flaps in combed marbled paper in red, orange, blue, and white ; upper and lower covers carry central blind-stamped mandorla and pendants with recessed onlays in a bronze color as well as border in a series of s-shaped stamps ; design continues to envelope flap ; sewn in cream/white thread, two stations ; worked endbands in red and cream, partially gone with core exposed ; in fair condition but with much abrasion, staining, and lifting and cracking of leather (particularly spine).', 'Support: European laid paper, perhaps more than one type ; mainly with chain lines spaced roughly 26-27 mm. apart, laid lines spaced roughly 10 laid lines per cm., orientation varying ; highly burnished ; varies from thin and fairly transluscent to thick and fairly opaque ; watermarks include three circles with eagle above and "C T B" in central circle also three circles with cross above and "A D B" in central circle ; staining and accretions, as well as many loose quires.', 'Decoration: Textual dividers in the form of hāʼ, etc. in red ; text rubricated with keywords, abbreviations, overlining, etc. in red.', 'Script: Naskh ; fine Persianate hand ; virtually sans serif ; mainly closed counters ; slight effect of tilt to the left ; dot of final nūn freely assimilated with bowl ; pointing for letters such as qāf, yāʼ, etc. often in form of caret ; shaddah, mādah, and hamzah used.', 'Layout: Written in 19 lines per page ; frame-ruled (impression of ruling board evident).', 'Collation: ii, 14 IV(112), 2 III(124), 6 IV(172), III (178) ; chiefly quaternions ; leaves falling between the two texts and at end left blank ; catchwords present ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes flyleaves and insert).', 'Colophon: [Thawāb al-ʻamāl] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم كتاب ثواب الاعمال بعون الملك المتعال وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد واله اجمعين على يد الحقير الفقير المذنب وهو المفتقر الى الله الغني محمد نقي بن حاجي مظفر علي پرچواني علياني من المحال الجولدر غفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه في التاريخ ثامنة وعشرون يوما من جمادى الاولى في سنة تسعة ومائة الف بعد الهجرة النبوية صلى الله عليه واله تم تم تم تم ..." [ʻIqāb al-ʻamāl] "Scribal," triangular, reads: "تم بالخير في يوم احد وعشرون يوما من شهر رجب المرجب في سنة تسعة ومائة الف سنة ١١٠٩ بعد الهجرة النبوي [كذا] صلى الله عليه واله في يد الحقير العبد المذنب الضعيف محمد نقي بن مغفور حاجي مظفر علي پرچوان عليان من محال جولدر غفر الله له ولوالديه واحسن اليهما واليه تم تم تم تم تم تم تم ..."', 'Explicit: [Thawāb al-ʻamāl] "قال اذا اصاب الرجل بنته بعث اليها ملكا فامر جناحه على راسها وصدرها وقام ضعيفة خلقت من ضعف المنفق عليها معان الى يوم القيامة" [ʻIqāb al-ʻamāl] "تاب الله عز وجل عليه قال ثم نزل فكانت اخر خطبة خطبها رسول الله صلى الله عليه واله وسلم حتى لحق بالله عز وجل تم كتاب عقاب الاعمال والحمد لله ولي الاماني والامال على كل حال من الاحوال واليه المرجع والماب وافضل صلواته واكمل تحياته على نبيه محمد واله ذي الفضل والافضال صلوة لا يحصيه مقال ولا يحويه مجال"', 'Incipit: [Thawāb al-ʻamāl] "الحمد لله الواحد القديم الازلي الذي لا يوصف بحد ولا نهاية ... قال محمد بن علي بن الحسين بن موسى بابويه رحمة الله عليه ان الذي دعاني الى تأليف كتابي هذا ما روي عن النبي صلى الله عليه واله انه قال الدال على الخير كفاعله وسميته كتاب ثواب الاعمال ..." [ʻIqāb al-ʻamāl] "و به ثقتي بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم وبه النجاة من العذاب الاليم عقاب من اتى من غير بابه"', 'Title supplied by cataloguer from opening on fol.2a (p.7) and colophon on fol.176b (p.358).', 'Ms. codex.', '4. fol.177a-fol.178b : [blank].', '3. fol.125b-fol.176b : ʻIqāb al-ʻamāl / Ibn Bābawayh, Shaykh-i Ṣadūq.', '2. fol.123b-fol.125a : [blank].', '1. fol.1b-fol.-123a : Thawāb al-ʻamāl / Ibn Bābawayh, Shaykh-i Ṣadūq.', 'Neat copy of the treatise by Abū Jaʻfar Muḥammad ibn ʻAlī ibn al-Ḥusayn ibn Mūsá ibn Bābawayh al-Qummī, Shaykh-i Ṣadūq, on rewards and punishments as addressed in various ḥadīth.'])

en: (count: ['Shelfmark: Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, Special Collections Research Center Isl. Ms. 910', 'Origin: Lacks dated colophon ; likely copied in Egypt in the late 1930s and eventually bound for James Heyworth-Dunne (d.1974). As appears in \'title page\' inscriptions on p.89 and p.121, the copyist has identified himself as "ا ع" as did the copyist in Isl. Ms. 937 (executed in 1934) and in Isl. Ms. 905 (executed in 1939), and still other manuscripts eventually bound for Heyworth-Dunne, see Isl. Mss. 937, Isl. Ms. 981, Isl. Ms. 988, Isl. Ms. 998 and likely Isl. Ms. 929.', 'Former shelfmark: Mich. Isl. Ms. temp. no. 59', 'Binding: Boards covered in dark green cloth with dark green leather over spine (quarter binding) ; pastedowns and flyleaves in wove paper printed with a floral vegetal pattern in green ; spine gold-stamped with title and decorative accents over raised bands "ثيولوجيا اريسطو | J.H.D." ; sewing difficult to examine ; stuck-on endbands (blue and white stripe) ; overall in fairly good condition.', 'Support: Wove paper in at least three types and four different sizes (dimensions of the page roughly 287 x 205, 257 x 165, 300 x 225, 300 x 200 mm. as trimmed), unlined and lined.', 'Decoration: Some section headings, passages of text, glosses and abbreviation symbols (mainly signes de renvoi) rubricated ; some overlining in red.', 'Script: Ruqʻah and naskh ; ruqʻah in a quick, compact hand in a medium line, serifless and freely ligatured with mainly closed counters, slight effect of words descending to baseline and inclination to the left, pointing somewhat careless and in strokes rather than distinct dots ; final section (repeating the muqaddimah and maymar 1-4) in naskh, a clear, modern hand, partially but irregularly seriffed with right-sloping head-serif on odd lām, ṭāʼ, etc. and rounded with curvilinear descenders, freely ligatured, pointing in strokes rather than distinct dots, final yāʼ usually unpointed.', 'Layout: Written in 14-22 lines per page.', 'Collation: Internal pagination for some sections in black ink, Hindu-Arabic numerals ; leaves between sections left blank or partially blank (to serve as title pages, see pp.1, 21, 37, 61, 89, 121, 153, 181, 224) ; pagination in pencil, Western numerals, supplied during digitization (includes back flyleaf).', 'Explicit: "وان كان حسنا لم يعمل الا حسنا فان كان هذا على ما وصفنا وكانت الطبيعة"', 'Incipit: "واما افلاطن الشريف الالهي فان قد وصف النفس فقال فيها اشياء كثيرة ... الميمر الثاني من كتاب اثولوجيا ... هذا كتاب اثولوجيا للفاضل المقدم اريسطو في الفن الربوبي من فنون ما بعد الطبيعة مقدمة جدير بكل ساع لمعرفة الغاية التي هو عائد اليها سعيا منبعثا ..."', "Title from opening 'title page' inscription on p.1.", 'Ms. codex.', "Careful copy of the Theology of Aristotle or Theologia Aristotelis, a work attributed to Aristotle but recognized to be an adapted translation of Plotinus' Enneades, IV-VI (collected and arranged by Porphyry). The text is arranged in eight sections not in consecutive order, opening with al-maymar al-thānī and closing with a reiteration of the muqaddimah and maymars 1-4 (see pp.181-222) followed by a fihrist (see pp.224-233)."])

en: (count: ['Contains tables.', 'Illuminated ʻunwāns at beginning of each section (pp. [3, 103, 129, 157, 175, 177]); chapter headings and colophon illuminated; rubricated text in two columns, enclosed within gold borders; marginal notes in hand of copyist.', "Date and copyist's name in colophon: katabahu al-faqīr ... Ḥāfiẓ Ṣāliḥ min talāmīdh al-sayyid ʻAbd Allāh wa-qad waqaʻa al-farāgh min tanmīqihi ... li-sanat arbaʻ wa-arbaʻūn wa-miʼah wa-alf....", 'Analysis of the various readings of the Koranic text according to different traditions.'])

en: (count: ['Watermarks: Anchor in circle. See Edward Heawood, Watermarks, Mainly of the 17th and 18th Centuries (Hilversum, 1950), nos. 1-8.', 'Contains a table of the risings and settings of the planets on each day of the week.', 'Text rubricated; marginal notes and corrections in hand of copyist.', 'Unidentified work. Copy defective: beginning missing up to last few pp. of bāb 1; also, 2 or 3 ff. missing between pp. [28-29].'])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated and has table of contents; marginal commentary in another hand.', "Date and copyist's name in colophon: tammat al-kitāb fī waqt bayn al-ṣalwatayn fī yawm ... huwa al-yawm al-khāmis ʻashar min shahr Ramaḍān ... min shuhūr sanat thalath wa-thalathīn wa-alf [i.e. 1 July 1624] ... al-ḥaqīr ... Muḥammad ibn ʻAbd Allāh min sukkān qaryat Yakīji-yi kabīr.", 'A collection of Islamic law according to the Ḥanafī tradition.'])

en: (count: ['Text rubricated; corrections and substantial marginal notes in hand of copyist and others; on p. [1] in margins: ḥāshiyat Ulugh Bayk ... qurrat ḥāshiyat al-musammayāt bi-Ulūgh Bayk al-wāqiʻ ʻalá al-Masʻūd al-Rūmī.', '"Glosses on the commentary of Kamāl al-Dīn Masʻūd ibn Ḥusain al-Shirwānī al-Rūmī (d. 905/1499) on the Ādāb al-baḥth ... of Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Ashraf al-Ḥusainī al-Samarḳandī (fl. 690/1291)." Cataloging by Elinor M. Husselman, 1945.', 'On dialectics.'])

en: (count: ['Contains geometrical diagrams.', 'Text rubricated; corrections in hand of copyist.', 'On the accurate marking of quadrants.'])

en: (count: ['Watermark: Scrollwork with crown and lion (?); eagle.', 'Text rubricated; marginal notes in Turkish in another hand.', 'Pp. [1-7]. Bound with: [2] Muḥammad ibn ʻAlī al-Ḥumaydī, Risālah fī al-ālah al-musammāh dhāt al-kursī, pp. [9-24]; [3] Bahāʾ al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥusayn al-ʻĀmilī, Tashrīḥ al-aflāk, pp. [25-34].', 'Unidentified treatise, in a muqaddimah and nine bābs.'])

1039 of 1039 records have the cho_description value